 The pace of global change itself demands a greater awareness of ‘whole world"" history . Not only does this symbolic moment provoke a mood of public retrospection .
 More than 20 years have passed since a major new atlas of this kind was published in the English language . More than 200 years have been passed since the atlas was published .
 There has been an explosion of new research into the histories of regions outside Europe and North America . There is a growing awareness of how parochial our traditional approach to history has been .
 In this changed environment, the demand for an un-biased overview of world history has grown in schools and colleges, and among the general reading public . Several developments within the study of academic history promote the seriousness with which histories of the world are now taken .
 First the accumulation of knowledge about the past of different nations has engendered excessive specialization . The accumulation of this knowledge has engender excessive specialization, he says .
 The sheer volume of publications and data about details of the past stimulates demand from students, scholars and a wider public for guidelines, meaning and meaning . World history, with its unconfined time frame and wider geographical focus, is positioned to meet .
 Study of history towards comparisons between Western and non-Western cultures and histories . In order to take account of modern concerns with, for example, ecology, evolutionary biology, botany, the health and wealth of populations, human rights, gender, gender and private life .
 Young people arrive at universities with portfolios of know-ledge and aroused curiosities about a variety of cultures . Thirdly young people now arrive at university with portfolios . They now arrive in universities with portfolio of knowledge and interest in cultures .
 They are less likely than their predecessors to study national let alone regional and parochial histories . They are also less likely to learn national and regional histories .
 Schools and universities need to provide access to the kind of historical understanding that will satisfy their interests . Schools need access to historical understanding to satisfy interests of students .
 To nourish the cosmopolitan sensibility required for the next millennium, history needs to be widened and repositioned . History needs to bring the subject into fruitful exchange with geography and the social sciences, says historian .
 Social scientists have analysed the implications of “globalization’ 1 for hitherto separated communities, disconnected economies and distinctive cultures . Archaeological, ancient, classical and medieval, medieval, early modern, contemporary and other “packages” of traditional but now anachronistic histories
 Philip’s Arias of World History has been designed, constructed and written by a team of professional historians not only for the general reader but to help teachers of history in schools and universities .
 World histories cannot be taught or read without a clear comprehension of the chronologies and regional parameters within which different empires, states and peoples have evolved through time .
 A modern historical atlas is the ideal mode of presentation for ready reference and for the easy acquisition of basic facts upon which courses in world history can be built, delivered and studied* Such atlases unify history with geography .
 Historical atlases should be accurate, accessible and display the unfurling chronology of world history in memorable maps and captions . Historians should be able to access the unfurlings of the world's history with memorable maps .
 Philip’s Atlas of World History set out to produce a popular work of reference that could be adopted for university and school courses in world history . The team of historians, cartographers and editors who collaborated in the construct ion of Philip's Atlas .
 Iri the U.S. and Canada such courses arc already commonplace . The subject is now spreading in Britain, Europe, Japan and China .
 American journals dealing with world history publish debates of how histories designed to so cover long chronologies and uncon fined geographies might he as rigorous and as intellectually compelling as more orthodox histories dealing with individuals, parishes, towns, regions, countries and continents .
 The editors attempted to become familiar with as many course outlines as possible . The editors are now familiar with many of the course outlines .
 Their plans for the atlas were informed by the ongoing, contemporary debate about the scale, scope and nature of world history .
 Most ‘model’ textbooks in world history are usually constructed around themes of “connections* 1 and “comparisons” across continents and civilizations . A scientifically informed appreciation of environmental, evolutionary and biological constraints on all human activity are regarded as basic to any understanding
 This atlas promotes the appreciation of “connections”, “contacts” and “encounters” promoted through trade, transportation, conquest, conquest and colonization . Through its carefully designed system of cross-referencing, this atlas .
 It aims to facilitate “comparisons’s” across space and through time of the major forces at work in world history, including warfare, revolutions, state formation, religious conversion, industrial development, scientific and technological discoveries, demographic change and migration .
 Histories or atlases of the world are potentially limitless in their geographical and chronological coverage . Histories can be easily limitless in the geographical or chronological coverage of historical and chronological records . Atlases could be unlimited in the world .
 As 1 write this foreword conflict escalates in the Middle Fast. History in its broadest context . Conflict escalates . As 1 writes this . foreword .
 This first section also covers connections and comparisons across the first civilizations in Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley, Egypt, China and Mesoameriea and South America . It also covers the later and more familiar empires of Greece, India, China, Greece and Rome .
 The editors have also ensured that small countries such as Central Asia, the Americas and Africa have found their place in this comprehensive atlas .
 World Wars of the 20th century, the Great Depression, the rise of communism and fascism, decolonization and the end of the Cold War and the events of the 1990s make the atlas a distinctive work of first references for courses in current affairs and contemporary history .
 Maps of seminal events in world history drawn using latest cartographic technology . Facts, brief analyses and illuminating maps of such seminal events as the birth of religions, the Roman Empire, Song China, the discovery of the Americas, the Scientific, French and Industrial Revolutions, the foundation of the
 A serious effort has been made wherever possible in the atlas to accord proper emphasis to communal concerns of humankind . Religion, economic welfare, trade, technology, health, the status of women and human rights are among the themes .
 Philip’s Atlas can he used easily to find out about a significant event, the history of defined places and populations . The atlas has also been designed in the context of a remarkable revival in world history .
 World history offers chronologies, perspectives and geographical parameters . It aims to attenuate the excesses of ethnicity, chauvinism and condescension . World history is a world of contrasts .
 The length and breadth of an atlas of world history covering all continents, and chronology going hack twelve millennia, can work to separate tlie provincial from the universal, the episodic from persistent .
 It can expose the decline as well as the rise of societies, nations, cultures and civilizations . It can exposed the decline and rise of society, nations and civilizations, it says .
 In so far this atlas succeeds in these goals, it can also help nurture a cosmopolitan sensibility for the new millennium . The atlas is designed to encourage students to learn about world history .
 By 9000 BC their descendants had spread to most parts of the globe and in some areas were beginning to practise agriculture . By 9,000 BC they had spread across most of the world .
 From around 4000 BC the first civilizations developed, initially in the Near East and India . They developed in China, Mesoamerica and South America .
 In the centuries that followed, to AD 500, many states and empires rose and fell . In the years following, the empires and empires of the past and present have fallen .
 Homo sapiens reached Australia by 60,000 and the Americas by 14,000 years ago . The migration of humans was greatly affected by a number of ke ages .
 The success of die hominid line (humans and their ancestors) is due to the adoption of this new method of moving on two legs rather than four .
 The development by Homo Homo of stone tools and, we may presume, tools that have not survived, made of other materials such as bone and wood was a major advance in human evolution, allowing our ancestors to engage in activities .
 This ability to develop technology to overcome our physical limitations has enabled us to develop from a small and restricted population of African apes to a species that has reached the moon .
 BetweenK million and 300,000 years ago, members of our genus colonized much of temperate Europe and Asia as well as tropical areas . The only parts of the globe which Homo sapiens had not reached were some remote islands and circumpolar regions .
 A Wilh the development of agriculture and settled communities there was a growing need for storage . Wilh was a pioneer of storage storage in the 1930s .
 Pottery began la be mode an a wide scale in order to meet this need, but il aba served as a vehicle far human artistic odivrty . Pottery became a vehicle for people to express their creativity .
 People in many pans of the world began to produce their own food, domesticating and selectively breeding plants and animals . Within the succeeding 8,000 years, the world was transformed by producing its own food .
 Farming supported larger and more settled communities, allowing the accumulation of stored food surpluses in lean years . Farming supported by larger settlements, but counterpoised risks involved in clearing areas of plants and animals that had formerly been a source of baek-up food .
 Agricultural communities expanded in many regions, including colonizing Europe and South Asia, and in doing so radically changed the landscape . Agricultural communities spread across the world, changing the landscape in many ways .
 They also give some insight into the rich spiritual and mythological life of the people who created them . They also include some of the richest spiritual, mythological lives of the world .
 As the millennia passed there was continuing innovation in agricultural techniques and tools, with the domestication of more plants and animals and the improvement by selective breeding of those already being exploited .
 These developments increased productivity and allowed the colonization of new areas . These developments allowed the development of new regions .
 Specialist pastoral groups moved into previously uninhabited, inhospitable desert regions . Specialised pastoral groups have moved into areas of the world's largest desert areas .
 Swamps were drained in Mesoamerica and South America . Highly productive raised fields were constructed in their place . Highly productive fields were built in place .
 Irrigation techniques allowed the cultivation of river valleys in otherwise arid regions, such as Mesopotamia and Egypt . The techniques were used to irrigate river valleys .
 High agricultural productivity supported high population densities . Towns and cities grew up, often with monumental public architecture .
 There were also limitations in these regions, such as unreliable climate or river regime, or scarcity of important raw materials . There was often conflict between neighbouring groups .
 Religious or secular leaders who could organize food storage and redistribution, craft production, trade, defence and social order became increasingly powerful in the 1930s and 1940s . Social order was created by religious leaders who organized food storage, redistribution and trade .
 The development of writing proved a major advance, enabling vast quantities of human knowledge and experience to be recorded, shared and passed on .
 In most societies literacy was confined to an elite priests, rulers and scribes they employed who used it as a means of religious, political or economic control . Nevertheless, literacy is still a vital part of society today .
 The belief that there should be universal access to knowledge recorded in writing is a recent phenomenon . In most parts of the world, the belief that . there should . be universal . access to . knowledge recorded on paper is a modern phenomenon .
 Without written records it is impossible to reconstruct details of the belief systems of past societies . Evidence of religious beliefs and ritual activities abounds in works of art, monumental structures and grave offerings .
 Differences in the locally available plants and animals and in local conditions gave rise to 1o modi variation between regions . Differences in plant and animal species and conditions in regions give rise to differences in local variations .
 Domestic animals ployed an important pari in Old World agriculture . Farmers in Mesoomerica and North America relied heavily on wild animals and crops for protein .
 In some areas, such as the Pacific coast af North America, on abundant supply of wild resources allowed settled communities to develop without agriculture . However, in some areas such as California, the population was able to rely on wild resources to survive .
 Building activity requires the ability to mobilize large numbers of people . This did not necessarily require hierarchical social control; it could be achieved within the framework of a community led by elders or priests .
 Concern with proper disposal of the dead was displayed from Neanderthal times, more than 50,000 years ago . Concern with the proper disposal was displayed more than half a century ago, experts say .
 In burial or other treatment of the body regarded as appropriate (such as cremation or exposure) the dead were often accompanied by grave offerings . In the burial or burial of the dead, the body was accompanied by a grave offering .
 Central Asian nomads were the periodic scourge of Wesl, South and East Asia for thousands of years, and Germanic confederacies, with Central Asians, brought dawn the Western Roman Empire . Elsewhere, however, formers, herders and hunter-gatherers continued their
 Grave offerings often provide valuable clues about past social organization . M Grave offerings are often valuable clues to past social organizations . For more information, visit www.grave.com .
 Artisans played important part in the development of civilized communities . Artisans produced prestige items for use by the elite and manufactured goods to be traded in exchange for vital raw materials .
 Craft production was unlikely to be a full-time pursuit for more than a handful of individuals . But this did not prevent high standards being reached in many communities . In developed agricultural societies, craft production was not a fulltime pursuit .
 Metalworking did not develop in all parts of the globe, due to the distribution of ores . Unlike pottery, which was made by the majority of settled communities, and stone, used for tools worldwide from very early times, metalworking didn't develop .
 Initially metal artefacts tended to be prestige objects, used to demonstrate individual or community status . Metal was soon used for producing tools as well as producing tools .
 The development of techniques for working iron, in particular, was a major breakthrough, given the abundance and widespread distribution of iron ore . The techniques were developed in the early 1900s .
 The formerly fertile lower reaches of the Euphrates, cradle of the Mesopotamian civilization, had suffered salination . The focus had shifted north to the competing Assyrian and Babylonian empires .
 In India the primary civilization had emerged along the Indus river system . After its fall, the focus of power and prosperity shifted to the Ganges Valley, which by the 3rd century was the centre of the Mauryan Empire .
 Much of Europe and adjacent regions of Asia and Africa were united through military conquest by the Romans . Europe svas also developing native states, and by the 1st century AD much of Europe was united by military conquest .
 Military conquest was not, however, the only means by which large areas were united . Military conquests were not only the means of uniting large areas .
 A complex interplay of political, economic, religious and social factors determined the pattern of the rise and fall of slates . The Andean region, for example, was dominated in the 1st millennium bc by the Chavin culture .
 On the fringes of the human world, pioneers continued to colonize new areas . Pioneers developed ways of life to enable them to settle in the circumpolar regions and deserts of Arabia .
 The Bobltans, Indians and Greeks, lor example, developed mathematics and astronomical knowledge la a high level . Chinese pioneered advances in a number of fields, among Ihem metallurgy and mining technology .
 Romans were also skilled innovators, particularly in engineering where in ihe public domain they built magnificent roads and aqueducts, such as ihe Pont du Card in France, pictured here .
 Imorianl people were often lavishly furnished with spectacular works of craftsmanship . T The hurrah of imporianlpeople was often lavished with works of art .
 The body of Princess fJou Wan of ihe Han kingdom of ZJiangshon In China was buried in the 2nd century St in this suit made of jade plaques bound togelher wilh gald thread .
 T races of eke earliest ancestors of humans, Australopitheeines, have been found in Africa, dating from between five and two million years ago when the forests had given way in places to more open savanna . A line of footprints discovered al Lactoli is vivid evidence
 Hominid fossils from this remote period are rare, since the creatures themselves were not numerous . The fossils are rare because of the lack of fossil evidence for the creatures .
 By two million years ago, hominids included Homo kahilis, small creatures whose diet probably included kills scavenged from carnivores . Unlike their AustraJopitheeine cousins, they were small creatures .
 If. habilis had begun to manufacture stone tools (called “Oldowan 1 * after the key site of Olduvai), roughly chipped to form an iceable edge for slicing through hide, digging and other activities .
 These developments, along with physical adaptation, were crucial in the amazing success of humans compared with other animal species . These developments were crucial to humans' amazing success compared to other animals .
 The move into temperate regions was made possible by a number of developments . By 1,8 million years ago this success was becoming apparent in the rapid spread of hominids .
 Hominids began to make new and more efficient tools, Including the multipurpose hand axe, which extended their physical capabilities . A substantial increase in body size allowed representatives of Homo to compete more successfully with other scavengers .
 Fire was important in providing warmth, light and protection against predators . Fire was also important for cooking food, thus making it easier to chew and digest .
 To cope with the temperate climate, hominids used caves and rock shelters sueh as those found at the famous Chinese site of Zhoukoudian . Cave dwellings are found in China .
 There had been a gradual cooling of the global climate by 2,4 million years ago . Ice sheets developing in the Arctic developed in the early 20th century .
 Short ice Jigcs occur approximately every 100,000 years . A pattern of short ice jigcs occurs approximately every . 100,00 years ago .
 Ice ages were interspersed w ith short phases of temperatures similar to or higher than those of today, and much longer periods i>f intermediate temperatures . These ice ages were overlaid with periods of shorter periods of higher temperatures .
 The pattern of ice advance and retreat had a major effect not only on the distribution of hominids and other mammals, but also on the preservation of their fossils . The picture that we have today is at best partial, so the picture of the past is at least partial .
 During w arm periods, hominids penetrated as far north as southern England . In cooler periods, sea levels fell and many coastal areas that are now submerged became habitable .
 Hie Iasi al ihe inhabited ronlinenls la be colonized by hominids was South America, probably between 11000 ond 11,000 yeors ago . Many hominid species Flourished in sub-Saharan Africa between h re and one million
 Around 100,000 years ago two hominid species were living in the eastern Mediterranean region . The emergence of modern humans was the birth of the first hominoid species .
 One of the Neanderthals was an early form of Homo sapiens who had first appeared some 20,000 years earlier in southern Africa . The other was a form of early Homo sapien who first appeared in southern African regions .
 One school of thought holds that the descendants of the first hominids to colonize these various regions had evolved in parallel . There was continuous gene flow between adjacent regions, spreading adaptations and changes throughout the hominid world .
 From Asia modern humans moved into the Americas, crossing the Bering Strait during an ice age when the land bridge of Beringia was exposed, and migrating southwards .
 The earliest incontrovertible evidence of humans in the Americas south of the glaciated area comes after the ice sheets began to retreat about 14,000 years ago . The date of this colonization is still debated .
 Early modern humans and their Neanderthal contemporaries used similar tools and seem to have been culturally related . Neanderthal tools seem to be culturally related to early modern humans .
 H sapiens was the first hominid to be able to communicate in a fully developed spoken language . Neanderthals and even earlier hominids may have communicated with sounds with sounds .
 This was a critical development, making possible detailed planning and discussion of group activities and interactions . It also allows the knowledge acquired through individual experience to be shared and transmitted from generation to generation .
 From about 100,000 years ago many aspects of human consciousness and aesthetic sense began to evolve, as evidenced by finely shaped and consciously planned stone tools of both Neanderthals and modern humans .
 The emergence of human consciousness becomes ever more apparent in the art that dates from about 35,000 BC, and very probably earlier in Australia . It is thought to be the earliest example of the emergence of consciousness in the world .
 Archaeologists have found exquisite figurines depicting both humans and animals, as well as magnificent animal and abstract paintings and engravings on the walls of caves and rock shelters .
 Early art has been found all over the world, with fine concentrations in Australia, Africa and Russia . The most famous finds are in southern France and adjacent Spain .
 H ergaster in Africa, H erectus in East Asia and H heidelbergensis in Europe . H erects in Asia and Europe are H ergasters in Africa .
 The paucity of hominid fossils makes their classification extremely difficult, and there are major and frequent changes in the interpretation of the limited evidence . There is no fossil evidence for hominoids in existence .
 This is particularly true of tubers, roots, leafy vegetables and fruits, which must have provided the bulk of the diet in areas such as Southeast Asia . This is especially true of the tubers and roots, roots .
 Cereals (rice, millet, wheat and barley) and pubes (beans, peas and the like) were the principal food plants . We have a clearer picture of the development of early agriculture in areas such as China and West Asia .
 It enabled people to accumulate possessions that today provide valuable evidence of their way of life . It also enabled them to accumulate valuable evidence that today provides them with valuable evidence .
 E vidence from many parts of the world indicates that during the final millennia of the last glacial age between around 16,000 and 12,000 years ago the range of foods eaten by humans broadened considerably .
 Nuts and other wild foods, particularly gazelle, were also important . Nuts, particularly nuts, are also important to the diet .
 Around 12,000 BC the global temperature began to rise, causing many changes . The climate began to change around 12.000 BC .
 Sea levels rose, flooding many coastal regions; this deprived some areas of vital resources but in others, such as Japan and Southeast Asia, it created new opportunities for fishing and gathering shellfish .
 Changes occurred in regional vegetation, with associated changes in fauna . Changes in vegetation and fauna were associated with changes in vegetation .
 Throughout Asia, particularly in the southeast, plant foods became increasingly important . Plant foods are becoming increasingly important in Asia .
 In the Levant wild cereals at first spread to cover a much larger area, increasing the opportunities for sedentary communities to develop . Wild cereals in the Levant first spread in the region, spreading to cover much larger areas .
 By 8000 bc, when conditions again became more favourable, these first farming communities had grown in size and number . They began to spread into other suitable areas and spread into more suitable areas .
 Around 7000 BC domesticated sheep and goats began to replace gazelle and other wild game as the main source of meat . Initially these new economies combined cultivated cereals with wild animals .
 They appeared over much of Anatolia and northern Mesopotamia by about 7000 BC . They were largely confined to areas where rain-fed agriculture was possible . They are now thought to be the world's oldest surviving species .
 Agricultural communities also emerged around the southeastern shores of the Caspian Sea, and at Mehrgarh on the western edge of the Indus plains . Agricultural communities emerged in the southeastern part of the region .
 Pottery, which began to be made in the Zagros region around this time, came into widespread use in the following centuries, and copper also began being traded and worked . Pottery was made in this time and came to widespread use later in centuries .
 Cattle, domesticated from the aurochs in the west and from native Indian cattle in South Asia, were now also important .
 By 5000 BC the development of more sophisticated agricultural techniques had enabled farming communities to spread into southern Mesopotamia, much of the Iranian Plateau and the IndoIranian borderlands .
 Farmers growing wheat and keeping sheep, goats and cattle moved into the adjacent Indus Valley . It was not until the 4th millennium bc, however, that farmers grew wheat and kept sheep and goats .
 The development of rice and millet cultivation by the Indus civilization led to a further spread of agriculture into the Ganges Valley and the south of India . The Indus culture led to the spread of rice cultivation in the region .
 Sites in India's northeast may owe their development of agriculture to contact with northern China . Eastern India also saw the introduction of rice cultivation from Southeast Asia .
 China's economies depended on cultivated millet* ti1<jnj4 with fruits and vegetables* chickens and pigs* While further south, in the delta of the Yangtze River, wet rice cultivation began .
 Both hunted game and fish continued to play an important role in the economy . Water buffalo and anti pigs were kept in this southern region .
 By 3000rc wet rice agriculture was becoming established in southern China, northern Thailand and Taiwan, and millet cultivation in northern China, by 3000rc .
 Communities in northwest grew wheat and barley, introduced from the agricultural communities of West or Central Asia . Communities in the northwest also grew wheat, barley and wheat .
 In Southeast Asia miners and fruits had probably been intensively exploited for millennia . They were probably intensively used for millennia in Southeast Asia .
 By 3000 iw; wet rice was also grown in this region and buffalo, pigs and chickens were raised, but wild resources remained important .
 The inhabitants of Korea anti Japan continued to rely on their abundant wild sources of food . They relied on fish, shellfish, deer* nuts and tubers .
 Around 15 crops and metallurgical techniques began spreading from China into these regions, reaching Korea via Manchuria and thence being taken to Japan . The techniques were taken from China to Korea and then Manchurium .
 Korea and Japan aha developed a sophislkaled bronze industry . Clear signs of developing social stratification appear at this time .
 M By 1000 K farming tommunities established  established ia many areas af Asia were linked by (rode) Many of the world's most important farming areas were established by the age of 1000 K .
 Areas of high agricultural productivity, such as southern Mesopotamia, were dependent on trade to obtain (be basic raw maleriok lading in the alluvial environment) such as wood and stone . Areas of . high . agricultural productivity were dependent . on trade .
 F5gs and cattle, indigenous to Europe, were kept, and wild plants and animals were aha exploited by these catty farmers . F5g and cattle were kept .
 Farming also spread into neighbouring areas and by 4Q0Q bc was widespread across the continent . The greater part of Europe was still sparsely Inhabited forest, only gradually being cleared over succeeding mfflennia .
 Postglacial conditions of the period 8000-4000 bc offered new opportunities to hunter-gatherers of Europe . Activity concentrated on coasts, lake margins and rivers, where both aquatic and land plants and animals could be exploited .
 Initially groups tended to move around on a seasonal basis, hut later more permanent communities were established, with temporary special-purpose Quotations . Dogs, domesticated from wolves, were kept to aid hunting .
 Some groups managed their woodlands by judicious use of fire to encourage hazel and other useful plants . The woodlands were managed by fire and fire .
 Early farmers in the southeast built villages of small square houses and made pottery, tools of polished stone and highly prized obsidian .
 By 5000 bc some communities were also using simple techniques to work copper . By 5000 BC some communities had also used simple techniques .
 Between 5500 and 4500 bc pioneering farming groups rapidly spread across central Europe, settling predominantly on the loess river valley soils .
 They kept cattle, raised crops and lived in large timber-framed long houses . They often also sheltered their animals .
 After about 4500 BC regional groups developed and farming settlements increased in number, spreading from the river valleys . At first these groups were culturally homogeneous .
 The hunter-gatherers in the central and western Mediterranean came into contact with early farmers colonizing southern parts of Italy . Early farmers colonized southern Italy in the early 1900s .
 They acquired pottery-making skills and domestic sheep and goats from these colonists . Later they also began to raise some crops, and later they also raised some crops .
 Megalith ic tombs markers affirming community ties to ancestral lands . Huge megalithic tombs marker affirms community ties with ancestral lands.
 These tombs took many forms over the centuries and were associated with a variety of rites, generally housing the bones of many iudindividuals* usually without grave goods .
 By 3500 bo a new economic pattern had developed as innovations emanating from West Asia spread through Europe via farming communities in southeast and rhe east .
 These included the use of animals for traction, transport and milk, woolly sheep, wheeled vehicles and the plough . Animals were used for traction and transport, transport, milk and milk .
 The need for tin, a rare and sparsely distributed metal, provided a stimulus to the further development of international trade in prestige materials . Chiefs were now' buried under massive barrows with splendid gold and bronze grave offerings, while lesser members of society w + erc interred under bar
 Command of metal ore sources gave certain communities pre-eminence . Some communities derived their Importance from a key position at the nodes of trade routes . Others derived their importance from their position at key positions on key trade routes.
 By 3000 Bt copper and gold metallurgy were practised across most of Europe . Q gold O Stow (kte art olgmwH)
 These metals were used to make prestige goods that enhanced the status of high-ranking individuals . They were used in prestige goods made by people who enhanced their status . The metals were made of metals used to create prestige goods .
 Corded Ware in eastern and northern Europe and, later, Beakers in central and western Europe enjoyed particular prosperity around this time . Scandinavia, which lacked indigenous metal ores, nevertheless became involved in international trade, and by the late 2nd millennium developed a major bronze industry based on
 Agriculture and livestock also brought wealth to favoured areas . There was a major expansion of farming onto light soils formerly under forest .
 Substantial field systems mark the organization of the agrarian landscape in at least some regions . Substantial fields are visible in some regions of the world .
 By the start of the 1st millennium, many of the more marginal areas for agriculture had become scoured or exhausted and abandoned .
 By the late 2nd millennium warfare was becoming a more serious business . Warfare and religion became more serious in the 2nd century .
 Armed conflict between individual leaders or raids by small groups remained the established pattern, rather than large-scale fighting . However, until the late centuries bc armed conflict between individuals and small groups was the pattern .
 A greater range of weapons was now in use, especially spears and swords . Their forms were changing frequently in response to technical improvements and fashion .
 Bronze was made into tools for everyday use by itinerant smiths . Bronze was in abundant supply and made into everyday use . It was used to make tools for daily use by smiths.
 Funerary rites became more varied in the Iron Age . Many graves particularly in wealthy areas contained lavish goods, as in the cemetery at Hallstatt in western Austria, which profited from the trade in salt .
 Substantial religious monuments were no longer built, religion now focusing on natural locations such as rivers and lakes . Religion now focuses on natural places such as lakes and rivers .
 During the 1st millennium BG much of France, Germany and the Alpine region came to be dominated by the Celtic peoples . Celtic peoples also settled in parts of Britain, Spain northern Italy and Anatolia .
 By the 3rd century BC towns were emerging in many parts of Europe, reflecting increased prosperity and more complex and larger-scale political organization .
 In the west this development was short-lived as Europe west of the Rhine progressively fell to Roman expansion . The Roman expansion of the Roman empire ended in the end of the century .
 In the east and north, Germanic and other peoples continued the life of peasant agriculture, trade, localized industry and warfare that had characterized much of the continent for many centuries .
 The majority of the artefacts would have been made of perishable materials such as wood, leather and plant fibres . Although generally only their stone tools survive, the majority of their artefacts are made of wood and leather .
 At Gwisho in Zambia a large find of organic objects, including wooden bows and arrows, bark containers, and leather bags and clothes, provides us with some insight into what is normally lost .
 Further information on the lives of African hunter-gatherers comes from their rich rock art, known in many areas of the continent but particularly in the Sahara and southern Africa .
 This gives a picture of archaeologically intangible activities such as dancing and traditional beliefs . This not only depicts aspects of everyday life, such as housing and clothing, but also gives a . picture of intangible activities .
 With the retreat of the ice sheets around this time conditions became warmer and wetter, creating new opportunities for hunter-gatherer communities . The retreat of ice sheets created opportunities for hunters-gathere communities .
 Rising sea levels encouraged the utilization of coastal resources, such as shellfish in southern Africa .
 Many groups moved between the coast and inland sites, exploiting seasonally available food resources . People also began to hunt smaller game in the forests that were spreading into former savanna regions .
 In the Sahara belt, largely uninhabited during the arid glacial period, extensive areas of grassland now developed . The existing restricted bodies of water expanded into great lakes and rivers .
 These became favoured areas of occupation, often supporting large permanent settlements . The inhabitants derived much of their livelihood from fish, aquatic mammals, waterfowl and water plants .
 Similar lakeside or riverine communities developed in other parts of the continent, for example around Lake Turkana in East Africa . Similar lakesides or river-side communities have also developed .
 With retreat of the ice sheets in temperate regions by about 10,000 it parts of Africa beta me warmer and welter, offering new erolagiral opportunities to the continent's population .
 Postglacial changes were particularly mocked in northern Africa, where increased humidity provided conditions favouring permanent settlements . Post-glacial change was particularly mocked .
 West Africa was the original home of many of the plant species that were taken into cultivation . The plant species were brought into cultivation in Africa .
 In the Nile Valley, nut-grass tubers had been intensively exploited since glacial times . By 11,000 bc cereals such as sorghum and probably barley were also managed .
 Sheep and goats, and some crop plants such as wheat, were introduced, probably from West Asia . Sheep, goats and goats have been introduced to the area .
 By about 5000 BC many communities in northern Africa were raising indigenous crop plants such as sorghum . They also kept domestic cattle, sheep and goats, though they also continued to hunt and fish .
 Dependence on agriculture intensified, domestic resources grew in importance, and the number of farming communities increased . The number of farmers in the region increased in recent years .
 From around 4000 BC, the Sahara region became increasingly dry . Lakes and rivers shrank and the desert expanded, reducing the areas attractive for settlement .
 The cultivation of tubers such as yams and of tree crops such as oil palm nuts probably began around this time . Although harder to document than cereal agriculture, it is believed to have begun around the same time .
 By around 3000 BC farming communities also began to appear in northern parts of East Africa . The first farming communities appeared in northern areas of the continent .
 They were familiar with the working of bronze, iron and gold and were involved in trade across the Sahara . This may have been the means by which knowledge of metallurgy reached sub-Saharan Africa .
 Sites with early evidence of copperworking, notably Akjoujt, have also yielded objects imported from North Africa . Sites with copperworking have also been found in the region .
 Egypt, Nubia and Ethiopia were now working metals and may also have been a source of technological expertise . Egypt may have been an important source of technology and expertise .
 Iron tools were very useful for forest clearance, agriculture, woodworking and other everyday activities . The spread of ironworking was at first extremely patchy, with iron tools being useful for agriculture and woodworking .
 The interrelations of these settlers with the native hunter-gatherer groups were varied . The settlers' relationship with the natives was varied and varied .
 Some hunter-gatherers in areas suitable for agriculture were totally displaced by the newcomers . Others established mutually beneficial relations, adopting aspects of the intrusive culture . Some groups raided the new farming communities to lift cattle, sheep or goats .
 The southwest was unsuited to the cultivation of the introduced crops, but hunter-gatherers there began to herd domestic sheep . The southwest is now home to the largest population in the world .
 By the late 1st millennium ad iron tools had largely replaced stone tools throughout most of Africa . Iron tools were largely replaced by stone tools .
 In some areas the Copperbelt in Zambia and Zaire, for example copper was being made into ornaments such as bangles . Gold would not be worked in the southern half of the continent before the close of the millennium .
 Paintings of chariots characteristic of the 1st millennium BC have been found in the Sahara . Paintings were found in 1st century BC in the region .
 Although these do not mark the actual routes taken by traders across the desert, they do provide evidence of their presence in the desert .
 Trans-Saharan trade was facilitated in the late centuries bc by the introduction of camels for transport . Camels were used to transport the world's largest trade routes .
 By the 2nd century the eastern settlers had reached northern Tanzania, from where they quickly spread through the coastal lowlands and inland regions of southeastern Africa . By the 3rd century they had reached Natal, reaching Natal .
 Bantu languages spread southwards along two main routes, in the east and west . Originating in part of southern West Africa (now eastern Nigeria and Cameroon) Banti languages .
 The areas these farmers penetrated were inhabited by hunter-gatherer communities, speaking Khoisan languages in the south and probably other areas .
 A few sites, such as Meadowcroft in North America and Monte Verde in South America, are sometimes claimed to have been occupied well before 12,000 bc .
 Uncontputed evidence of people at these and other sites dates from 12,000 bc onwards, with Fell's Cave in the extreme southern tip of the continent being occupied by 9000 bc .
 During glacial periods when sea levels fell, the Bering Strait became dry land . It allowed humans living in Siberia to move across into the northernmost part of the Americas .
 Ice sheets would have prevented further overland penetration of the continent . However, substantial ice sheets would then have prevented overland entry .
 Only subsequently, when the ice sheets melted, could further advances occur . Migration into the Americas took place by sea, down the Pacific coast .
 Several glacial cycles occurred following the emergence of modern humans during which, at least hypothetically, such a migration could have taken place . The migration is hypothetically possible .
 The colonization of the Americas after 10,000 BC was extremely rapid, taking place within a thousand years . The colonization took place between 10,00 BC and 10,500 BC .
 First Americans were mainly big-game hunters, although occasional finds of plant material show that they had a varied diet . The first Americans were mostly big game hunters, but sometimes found plant material .
 Humans probably played some part in these extinctions, although changes in climate and environment are also likely factors .
 Hunting was generally an individual activity, but occasionally groups of hunters and their families combined in a great drive to stampede bison over a cliff or into a natural corral . Huge numbers could be slaughtered at once .
 In North America, a great range of regional variations developed on the theme of hunting and gathering . In many areas these ways of life survived until the appearance of European settlers in recent centuries .
 Their inventiveness enabled them to develop equipment such as the igloo and the kayak to withstand the intense cold of winter and of the Arctic seas, and to hunt large blubber-rich sea mammals .
 The inhabitants of the Pacific Coast region grew prosperous on their annual catch of salmon and other marine and riverine resources . The population of the region was prosperous on the catch .
 "They acquired slaves, constructed spectacular wooden structures and gave magnificent feasts," they said . They acquired slaves and constructed spectacular structures .
 Later, many groups also participated in regional trade networks, obtaining valued commodities such as turquoise and obsidian in the southwest .
 Some eastern groups were able to settle in camps for much of the year, burying their dead in large cemeteries . In areas of abundance, some eastern groups settled in camps .
 Woodlanders also developed long-distance trade networks, exchanging copper, marine shells and fine-quality stone for toolmaking .
 Groups in the Ohio Valley and adjacent areas (the Adena and Hopewell cultures) elaborated their exchange networks and raised substantial mounds over their dead . Later, groups in the . Ohio Valley, adjacent areas, elaborated their . exchange networks .
 By about 2500-2000 BC some groups in the eastern region were cultivating local plants, such as sunflowers and squashes .
 By 5000 BC they were also cultivating plants acquired from other regions of Mesoamerica . The plants were also cultivated in Mesoamanica .
 Among these was maize, at first an insignificant plant with cobs barely 3 cm long . Maude was the first maize plant to be grown in China .
 By 2000-1500 BC maize had become the staple of Mesoamerican agriculture, supplemented by beans and other vegetables . Genetic changes progressively increased the size of the cobs .
 Villages in the highlands could now depend entirely on agriculture for their plant foods and were occupied all year round . Villages now depend on agriculture instead of relying on farming for their food .
 These included plants (such as beans and chillies) native to the jungle lowlands to the east . Along with local varieties like potatoes, these included plants .
 It is likely that South American agriculture began in the Amazon Basin . But humid conditions in this area precluded the preservation of ancient plant remains .
 By this time village communities had established throughout the Andean region and had developed strategies to exploit a variety of local resources . Village communities were established in Andean villages .
 The coast provided exceptionally rich fisheries, while inland crops were cultivated using irrigation . Cotton was particularly important, with cotton particularly important in cotton .
 The lower slopes of the Andes were also cultivated, with crops such as potatoes at higher altitudes . llamas and alpacas of the high pastures provided meat and wool . The llamas also provided meat, wool and meat .
 Early South Americans built religious centres with monumental structures . Early South American religious centres were also built with monumental buildings .
 10,000 bc-ad 1000 3 lAsm Isla m Af Quern/ • Alii pJatfwm/slalufl this early date for a network of drainage channels .
 Around 1500 eg a new wave of colonists began to spread out from this area, moving from the mainland into Taiwan and the Philippines, then into the islands of Southeast Asia and from here into the Pacific . Farming communities were also developing in Fast and Southeast Asia; .
 By 1000 kg they had reached the Marianas in the north and, much further afield, Tonga and Samoa in Polynesia to the east . By 2000 kg, they had also reached Tonga, Samoa and Tonga .
 The movement of these people can be traced from the distribution of their distinctive pottery, known as Lapita ware, a red-slipped ware decorated with elaborate stamped designs . Lapita pottery is a red slipped pottery decorated with designs .
 They also brought with them a range of Southeast Asian domestic animals, including dogs and chickens . They also used obsidian and shell for making tools, and brought with a variety of domestic animals .
 By this time the colonists had become skilled navigators . They sailed in double canoes or outriggers large enough to accommodate livestock as well as people .
 The uniformity of their artefacts shows that contacts were maintained throughout the area, with return as well as outward journeys .
 The Polynesians used the stars, ocean currents, winds and other natural phenomena as navigational guides . They made ocean charts of palm sticks with the islands marked by cowrie shells .
 No Easter Island statues were erected after 1600 and by 1863 all existing ones had been deliberately toppled . By 1863 existing statues were deliberately toppled (to be re erected from the 1950s) by 1863 .
 T he Pacific was one of the Iasi regions on Earth to be colonized by people . The Pacific was the first Iasi region on Earth that was colonized .
 Among the stones the early Maori settlers af New Zealand become skilled in carving was jade . Expansion into the rest of the Pacific began around 1500 bc and was not completed until AD 1000 .
 Asian peoples colonized the Pacific islands after about 1500 k b . They cartied with them all the plants and animals they required to establish horticultural comm unities .
 They gathered a variety of wild resources and hunted the local fauna, which at that time included a number of large species such as a giant kangaroo, Procopttxion .
 The harsh desert interior of Australia was colonized by groups who adapted their lifestyle to cope with this challenging environment . Groups adapted to survive the harsh desert environment .
 New tools were now in use, including the boomerang (invented by 8000 bc) and small, line stone tools suited to a variety of tasks . Wood-working was of prime importance for wood-working .
 The dingo, a semi-wild dog, had been introduced into Australia, perhaps brought in by a new wave of immigrants from Southeast Asia . It is thought to have been introduced to Australia by Southeast Asian immigrants .
 Dingoes outeompeted the native predators such as the thvlaeine, a carnivorous marsupial which became extinct . Dingoes are now thought to have out-competeted predators like the thvaeine . The thvaiine was a carniv
 Australia’s aborigines exercised considerable control over the wild resources at their disposal . Presetting in order to encourage new growth and attract or drive game, and replanting certain preferred plant species .
 Among the items traded were various types of stone used far making tools and weapons, including greenstone Far Warcluhs and amulets .
 Easter Island statues are the best known and most striking of these statues . The best known are the statues of Easter Island islanders .
 Easter Island and I lawaii were settled in a further colonizing movement by around An 400 . Nearly 2,000 kilometres from Pitcairn, Easter Island was probably never revisited after its initial settlement .
 New Zealand is unique in the Pacific in enjoying a temperate climate . Tropical plants cultivated by Polynesians elsewhere in the region could not grow here, although sweet potatoes (introduced into Polynesia from South America) flourished .
 There was also a large population of huge flightless birds, which had evolved in great diversity due to the absence of mammals and predators . In compensation there were rich marine resources and a wide range of edible plants indigenous to the islands .
 As South Island was m)suited to agriculture its population declined . On North Island increased reliance on horticulture went hand in hand with warfare between the communities, accompanied by the building of fortified settlements .
 The unstable physical environment of Mesopotamia caused many radical changes in the pattern of settlement . Mesopotamia and the INDUS REGION 4000-1800 bc was the birthplace of the world's first civilization .
 Sediments from the Tigris and Euphrates filled in the head of the Gulf, isolating ancient ports . The ancient ports were isolated from each other by the rivers and rivers .
 The courses of the rivers also changed, taking precious river water away from settlements . Moreover, the courses of rivers also took precious water from settlements.
 Since rainfall was inadequate to sustain crops, these settlements were usually soon abandoned .
 Warka's 9-kilometre city wall enclosed temples, palaces and houses, sometimes grouped into craft quarters, as well as open spaces for gardens, burials and waste disposal .
 Indus cities, by contrast, generally comprised a large planned residential area and a raised citadel with public buildings and, probably, accommodation for the rulers . They were likely to have been built in the 1920s and 1930s .
 In the largest, Mohenjo-daro, the lower town contained both spacious private houses and industrial areas hosting the full range of Indus crafts . The lower town is known for its wide range of crafts, such as carpentry .
 In some areas high productivity supported high population densities and the emergence of cities, necessitating more complex social organization and giving rise to more elaborate public architecture . In some parts of the world the productivity of the industrial revolution led to urbanization .
 These developments encouraged trade in essential and luxury goods as well as craft, craft and other occupational specialization . Inventors were encouraged to trade essential, luxury goods .
 Such ‘civilized’ communities appeared first in Mesopotamia, around 4000 bc. Such "civilized" communities first appeared first to be found around 4,000 bc.
 Religious complexes were larger and increasingly elaborate throughout the period . Religious complexes became larger and more elaborate throughout period .
 Warka, also called Uruk, was one of a number of urban centres in ancient times . The ancient city was also known as Wara, or Urukh .
 The city had at least two very large religious precincts Eanna and Kullaba . The city also had a large religious precinct .
 These first texts were economic in nature, comprising lists and amounts of goods and payments . They were economic texts, with lists, amounts and payments, and were written in the form of economic texts .
 By 2900 BC there were also important urban centres in southern Mesopotamia city-states ruled by individual kings . Individual kings negotiated shifting economic and political alliances among themselves and with polities outside Mesopotia .
 The wealth and power of the Early Dynastic rulers can be seen in the elaborate burials in the Royal Cemetery of Ur . Some of the burials include human sacrifices as well as objects of gold, silver and lapis lazuli .
 Sumer and Akkad were not political entities but regions whose people spoke two different languages while sharing a common material culture . Sumer was not a political entity but a region whose people speak two languages .
 Around 2350 BC Sargon I, a charismatic and powerful Akkadian ruler, subjugated all Sumer and Akkad . He also conquered lands to the northwest as far as Turkey and the Mediterranean, and to the east as far .
 By 2200 BC it had collapsed and was followed by a period of Sumerian revival . His was perhaps the first empire to outlast the life of its founder, but by 2200BC had collapsed .
 Ur, long an important Sumerian city, came to dominate the region . At the close of the 3rd millennium BC Ur, Ur was an important city in the area . Ur came to prominence at the end of the Bronze Age .
 The Third Dynasty of Ur ruled the cities of Sumer and Akkad and east beyond the Zagros Mountains . It established a system of governors and tax collectors that formed the skeleton for the complex bureaucracy needed to control large population .
 The literate Sumerians provide an invaluable source of information on contemporary cultures . From whom they obtained essential raw materials such as metals, wood and minerals, they obtained luxuries including lapis lazuli .
 Dilmun acted as an entrepot in this trade, but there were also Meluhhan merchants resident in some Sumerian cities . Dilmun was the first city to act as a trade partner in Dilmun . There were also also some merchants in some cities .
 Sumer exported textiles, oil and barley to its trading partners, but the Indus people were probably most interested in receiving silver obtained by Sumer from further west .
 It is likely that Magan was an intermediary for trade along the Arabian coast with Africa . The source of several types of millet introduced into India at this time was the millet .
 Indus people also had writing, but the surviving texts have yet to be deciphered . The surviving texts are brief inscriptions on seals and copper tablets . They probably contain little beyond names and titles .
 By the 3rd millennium bc, lapis lazuli trade had become an Indus monopoly . By the later 3rd century bc, they were trading directly with the Indus region .
 The area at the mouth of these rivers was important in both local and international trade . The area is now home to a museum of the history of the area .
 Within their overall similarity of plan there was considerable local variation, particularly in the layout of the citadel, probably reflecting differences in religious and cultural practices . The layout of this citadel was probably reflecting the fact that it was largely similar to the other .
 Kalibangan and Lothal had pits where sacrificial material was burnt . In contrast, the pits were pits where sacrifices were burnt .
 Despite some regional variation, uniformity was a keynote of the Indus civilization . The Indus culture was one of the world's most successful civilizations .
 Throughout the Indus realms high-quality goods such as pottery, flint blades and copper objects, shell and stone beads and bangles, and steatite seals were manufactured from the best materials available .
 Indus people owed much of their prosperity to the rich agricultural potential of their river valleys . A significant proportion of the population were mobile pastoralists, their flocks and herds grazing in the adjacent forests and grassy uplands .
 Mobile huntergatherers provided the means by which the Indus people obtained goods and materials from other regions of the subcontinent . Mobile hunter-gouglers provided the way by which they obtained goods . In exchange for cultivated grain, domestic animals and manufactured goods .
 The fishers of the Arawalli Hills also participated in this network, trading their locally mined copper . Fishers also participated . The network was set up by the local community in the region .
 It was headed by a divine king who was known as the son of Ra, the sun god . The kingdom was ruled by a king known as Ra, who was also known as a god of Ra .
 Some experts say pyramids represented the staircase along which the pharaoh would return to the heavens after his death . Some experts believe pyramids were a staircase to the afterlife . The pyramids are believed to have been built in Egypt .
 Khafre's Sphinx is 73 metres in length and carved from a limestone outcrop . Close by is the Sphinx, 73 metres long and carved out of limestone outcrops . The Sphinx was built in the same place as the Great Sphinx .
 Originally it was plastered and brightly painted, the bearded face wearing a spectacular headdress sporting a cobra motif . Originally it had been plastered with brightly painted and brightly paintied .
 While the Nile Valley provided fertile soils, the surrounding deserts yielded precious metals and building stone used in ambitious artistic and architectural endeavours such as the pyramids . The Nile Valley was fertile soil and fertile soil .
 T he he first civilizations emerged in areas where high agricultural productivity was possible, supporting dense populations . The first civilizations were likely to emerge from areas where agricultural productivity is possible .
 In the Old World they appeared along the rivers in Mesopotamia, northern India, Egypt and northern China . In Mesopotamian times, they were found in northern India and Egypt .
 Craft specialization developed, trade flourished, writing began and rulers were given elaborate burials .
 Each civilization also had unique features rooted in its own cultural background and environment . However, each civilization had its own unique features .
 Life in Ancient Egypt evolved around the Nile, which provided a regular water supply and fertile soils . This made agricultural production possible in the surrounding desert regions .
 Navigation on the river was easy, as boats could travel northwards with the current or sail southwards on the northerly winds . Navigation was easy as boats were able to sail northwards or southwards with northerlies .
 From the 5th millennium bc farming communities along the Nile gradually began to merge into a cultural, political and economic unit . The Nile is a major source of cultural and economic history .
 This process of unification was encouraged by trading contacts and the need to control the floodwaters of the Nile . This process was also encouraged by the need for the Nile to be controlled .
 To reap the benefits of the yearly inundation of the river, communities had to work together to build dams, flood basins and irrigation channels .
 The period of the first Egyptian dynasties was one of great cultural and economic significance . Hieroglyphic script was developed and administrative centres were established .
 Eventually the rule of the Old Kingdom dynasties collapsed, possibly because of the expanding power of the provincial governors, or perhaps because scarce rainfall led to famine and unrest . The rule of Old Kingdom Dynasties may have collapsed because of drought and famine .
 In search of building materials, gold and luxury items, the pharaohs established a wide trade network . Egypt's trade network was established in search of gold, building materials and gold .
 During the Old Kingdom period links were forged with many areas of West Asia, including Byblos on the Lebanese coast, predominantly in a search for timber . During the period, expeditions were sent to mine turquoise, copper and malachite in Sinai Desert .
 The Eastern Desert yielded copper and stone and gave access to the harbours on the Red Sea, from where trade with East Africa and Arabia was conducted . The Desert was the source of trade between Arabia and East Africa .
 The area to the south of the First Cataract along the Nile became a prime target for expansion . While these trading missions were mainly peaceful, the area became the target of expansion .
 This land, called Nubia or Kush, offered large quantities of gold as well as connections with the African hinterland . It was an important source of spices, ebony, ivory, ivory and other luxury goods .
 During the Old Kingdom period, a mining settlement was established at Buhen . It was the first step in a process of southward expansion which would peak in the 15th century bc.
 Arts and crafts flourished in Ancient Egypt, particularly in the service of religion and in providing for the dead .
 Religion also played a major role in northern China, where ancestors were consulted by divination using oracle bones prior to important events such as hunting trips, childbirth and military campaigns .
 Around 1700 bc the Shang civilization emerged as a powerful new state in the northern plains of China . The Shang civilization was a powerful state in China .
 It is known from later historical sources, from magnificent archaeological remains of cities and great tombs, and from written inscriptions carved on oracle bones .
 The first Shang king, Tang, achieved dominance by defeating 11 other peoples and then winning over 36 more by his fair rule and moral leadership . Tang's fair rule was his moral leadership, and he was able to win 36 more .
 Shang rule reached its greatest extent under Wu Ding, one of Tang’s successors . Wu Ding was renowned for his wisdom and led a series of successful military campaigns .
 Wu Ding was supported in his campaigns by his consort Fu Hao, who herself led armies into battle against the hostile Fang people . Wu Ding's wife was also involved in the campaigns .
 The secret of Shang military success was the use of war chariots . War chariots were so prized that they were sometimes included in burials . The Shang Shang used chariots to transport their enemies .
 We know most about the last capital, Yin (near modern modern Anyang), which was founded by Pan Geng in about 1400 bc. It is believed to have been the first capital in China's history . Yin was founded in 1400 bc .
 Yin was Located on the marshy plains of the Huang lie River, at that time a warmer and moister environment than now exists . Yin was located in a warmer environment than today exists .
 The coast was considerably closer and the region was fertile, supporting two crops a year a year of rice and millet . The region is fertile and fertile, and the coast was not far from the coast .
 Water buffalo and wild boar roamed the Luxuriant forests which have long since disapjxjared . Water buffalo, boar and other wild animals were once abundant in the region .
 Yin spraw led over a large area in which residential compounds for the ruling elite and clusters of commoners' dwellings were interspersed with bronze foundries and workshops producing jade and lacquer ware .
 At its centre lay the royal palaces and ancestor temples set atop platforms of pounded earth, and a royal cemetery where kings lay in magnificent shaft graves . At the centre of the royal cemetery was a magnificent shaft grave .
 We know little about the later Shang rulers, except for the debaucheries of the last king, the tyrannical Chou . The last king of the Shang Shang was a tyrannical king .
 Cast brume vessels were used to serve food and drink in ceremonies honouring antestors . They followed the traditional shapes previously made in pottery, often intricately decorated and featuring ihe face of a monster .
 The discovery of nwny fine bronzes nl Saningdw in Serhuon proves the existente ol exidlent bronze working traditions outside ihe Shang area .
 Fie Shang stale was the most important of China s early states and the only one that was literate . Working in bronze probably began earlier in Southeast Asia and soulh China .
 From Ihe orade banes the Shang employed to foretell the outcome of military tompaigns, we know the names of many fijag with whom they were in confhl at various times . The Shang used the banes to predict military victories .
 Shang kings maintained a small personal bodyguard bat bat toufd raise armies of up to 5,000 men from their provinces in wartime . Shang kings kept a small bodyguard with a personal army of 5.000 men .
 Foot soldiers were mainly foot soldiers armed with halberds, supporting an elite force of choriotry . Foot soldiers armed themselves with halbs, supporting the elite force .
 Bronze vessels produced in Shring Own were decorated with animal motifs . Many bronze vessels were made of bronze .
 B y 1200 DC much of Mesoam erica was inhabited by agricultural communities . Agricultural communities were linked through trade in both essential everyday commodities and exotic materials . The communities traded essential everyday and exotic commodities .
 The most prosperous area at this time was the Gulf Coast, where annual river flooding supported rich agriculture . Some scholars believe that the Olmec dominated Mesoamerica, controlling the settlements in which their distinctive artefacts have been found . Others believe that they were religious leaders of the time
 Another school of thought views the Olmec as the most visible and most easily identified of a number of contemporary regional cultures that were mutually influential . The Olmeca is the most recognizable and easily identified among a range of cultural influences .
 Much that is characteristic of later Mesoameriean civilization is already evident in the Olmec culture . Much that was characteristic of . later Mes .americ culture is already characteristic of the . Olmic culture .
 The concern with the movements of sun, moon and stars underlies much Mesoamerieati religion . The first temple pyramids and plazas have been found in the Olmec ceremonial centres .
 The characteristic colossal carved heads, which may be portraits of Olmec rulers, wear helmets for the ritual ballgame . Ballgame was a dangerous sport with religious significance that was part of most Mesoameriean cultures .
 Stingray spines and other objects used to draw blood have been found at Olmec sites . Personal blood sacrifice, practised in later Mesoameriean religions, also appears to have been a feature of Olmeca life .
 These items were widely traded as were both jade, which had great ritual importance, and obsidian . obsidian was used to make exceptionally sharp tools but also fine ritual or status objects . Jade, obsidian and jade were also considered important items .
 Olmec pottery’ and figurines (including the characteristic “were-jaguar” babies) served the same purpose . The widespread distribution of these materials reflects their religious significance throughout Mesoamerica .
 Part 1 what is known as the Classic Period, which lasted until around AD 900 . The Classic Period was known as 'Classic Period', which lasted between AD 900 and AD 1300 .
 Agricultural productivity now greatly increased in this region as irrigation techniques using wells and canals were developed to supplement rain-fed farming .
 Like the Olmec, all these civilizations were heavily involved in trade . All these civilizations, all of them, were involved in trading .
 Like Teotihuacan, it was the ceremonial and political centre of its state . But in contrast it was not the centre for regional craft production .
 Ballcourts and depictions of sacrificial victims at Monte Alban show the continuation in the highland zone of the religious practices of the Olmec times .
 Written symbols continued to be used to record dates and related information . Also continued was the use of written symbols to record events and dates .
 Maya writing system was extremely complex, with many variations in the form of individual glyphs and in the way in which a word could be expressed . Maya writing was extremely difficult to write and was written in the Early Maya civilization .
 It was also used to record an extremely elaborate calendric system, including the 52-year repeating cycle used throughout Mesoamerica and the Maya Long Count, a cycle beginning in 3114 BC .
 These depended both on a detailed knowledge of astronomical patterns and on sophisticated mathematics, including the concept of zero .
 Scholars have pieced together the dynastic history of many of the Maya kingdoms . The Maya script is still not fully deciphered, but scholars are able to read many inscriptions on carved stelae .
 Maya inscriptions record the descent of each ruler from a founding ancestor, his performance of appropriate ritual activities on dates of significance in the astronomical religious calendar, and his victories over neighbouring rulers .
 Blood sacrifice was of central importance in Maya and other Mesoamerican religions . The belief that human blood nourished divine beings and opened a pathway through which humans could communicate with the spirit world .
 Maya king was responsible for the well-being of his state through the provision of sacrificial victims and by letting his own blood .
 Members of the king’s family were appointed as provincial governors of lesser centres within the kingdom . They also acted in other official capacities including that of scribe .
 The pattern of existence that had emerged in Olmec times continued to be the template for the Mesoamerican way of life until the time of the European conquest in the 16th century .
 House compounds in Maya cities were interspersed with doorstep gardens and raised fields in swamp areas . A great variety of crops were grown in both .
 Agricultural lands supporting Teotihuacan lay outside the city, in the Basin of Mexico . By contrast the agricultural lands supporting the city lay outside of the city .
 Highland and lowland cities alike, however, focused on a ceremonial centre containing temples and the residences and burial places of the elite .
 Highly productive raised fields were constructed between grids of canals . The known extent of these fields is likely to represent only a fraction of what once existed .
 Trade played an important role in Maya life, providing materials for daily living, religious rituals and status symbols . As in other Mesoamerican civilizations, trade played a role in daily living .
 Imported from the coast of Ecuador, they were an important commodity in the exchange networks that ensured the distribution of foodstuffs and other raw materials between the different regions of the Andean zone during the Chavin period .
 Chavin de Huantar was at the centre of trade routes running north-south and east-west . It is thought to have been the most important town in the world .
 In some areas roads were built to facilitate trade and communications, and these networks changed little in later periods . In later periods, the networks of roads and communications changed little .
 B y the late 2nd millennium BC a patchwork of interrelated farming settlements existed throughout the Andean region . From coasts and lowland valleys to high pastures, there were farming settlements throughout the region .
 Those in coastal regions were characteristically built in the shape of a U, with terraced mounds laid out along three sides of a rectangular plaza . A pyramid often stood on the central mound, with a pyramid often standing on the main mound .
 Some of these temple complexes notably Gerro Sechin, where graphic carvings of victims survive give evidence of human sacrifice as a part of the rites performed . Some of the temple complexes have been found to have been built in ancient times .
 Chavin de Huantar became a place of pilgrimage, the centre of a cult that was widespread in its influence . Housing the shrine of an oracular fanged deity set within labyrinthine passages, it became a pilgrimage destination .
 Carvings decorating the temple mounds focused on religious themes, as did designs on pottery, jewellery and other objects . The mounds were also decorated with religious themes .
 Chief among these was the Chavin deity, which continued to be worshipped down the ages in various forms, such as the Staff God of Tiwanaku . Chief among the deities was the staff God of the staff god, which was worshipped throughout the ages .
 Other supernatural creatures included jaguars, caymans and composite beasts . Shamans were also depicted and they were believed to be able to transform themselves into exotic birds and animals .
 Traded objects, such as goldwork, were included as grave goods in the elaborate burials of the Chavin elite . Goldwork was included in grave goods among the grave goods .
 These burials were often placed in shaft tombs within the platforms of the Chavin ceremonial centres . The practice endured down the ages for example .
 Their craftsmanship survived in an extensive cemetery containing numerous mummies of elite individuals wrapped in beautifully embroidered cotton textiles and accompanied by fine pottery and goldwork .
 Some vessels were designed in the form of trophy heads, and real heads pierced for suspension on a rope have been recovered from Nazca cemeteries . Real heads were found at the chief Nazca ceremonial centre of Cahuachi .
 Cahuachi seems not to have functioned as a town, though it was probably a place occupied briefly by thousands of pilgrims during religious ceremonies and festivals . Unlike Chavin de Huantar and the ceremonial centres of other Andean civilizations,
 Nazca Lines were created by removing stones to expose the light desert soil beneath . They depict animals, birds and geometric shapes familiar from the Nazca pottery .
 Their form can only be appreciated from the air, so they are thought to have been intended for the gods to view and used in the performance of religious activities . The form of the gods is thought to be only visible from the sky .
 The Moche culture was centred on the site of Moche, in northwest Peru . It was also centred in the region of northwest Peruvian .
 Its adobe pyramids were among the largest in the New World . They contained temples and rich tombs later desecrated by other Andean peoples and the Spanish .
 Through time, the Moche spread to most of the northern coast of Peru, from the Huarmey Valley in the south to the Lambayeque Valley in north . The latest phase of the latest phase is the Lambayque Valley .
 Nazca culture is well represented by large cemeteries and substantial religious structures of mudbrick . Further south, the Nazcan culture is also well represented in large religious structures .
 Irrigation ployed on importoni role in South American agriculture, and water canirol was well developed during the dim period when a series of canals was skilfully used .
 Some of these irrigation systems have survived into modern limes . Others have recently been revived and are proving far more successful than modern methods .
 In the period ad 600—1000 Andean South America contained at least three expansive political entities embracing distinct ecological zones and ethnic groups .
 Recent discovery of an unlooted pyramid at Sipan, containing the burials of two Moche lords, has given us a vivid picture of Moche burial practices .
 These lords were lavishly robed in garments decorated with gold and silver, copper and feathers . They were provided with rich grave goods in the same materials, along with spondylus and strombus shells .
 Details of burials are familiar from decoration on painted or moulded pottery . Details of these burials can be found on pottery and pottery from the graves of the dead .
 Moche ceramics also included some of the first portrait effigies in the Americas, cast from moulds and often into stirruphandled vessels common to Peru .
 Although heavy in religious imagery, these ceramics are unusually narrative for South American art . Some scholars postulate influence from other areas such as Mesoamerica .
 Tiwanaku, near Lake Titicaca, is a city of comparable complexity . More distant still lay a similar city of similar complexity, Tiwanak, near the lake .
 Although both cities had emerged 400, the connection between them remains enigmatic . The connection between the two remains enigmatic.
 The Huari and Tiwanaku were not so much dual capitals of one empire as antagonistic polities . One Huari was oriented to the north, the other to the high timberless plains known as the altiplano .
 Whether the fields around Lake Titicaca were systematically organized and harvested by the Tiwanaku state continues to be controversial .
 Field research in Moquegua Valley indicates late Tiwanaku expansion into a number of enclaves, with maize in particular being cultivated .
 This valley was important as the source of many prized materials which included lapis lazuli, turquoise, obsidian and copper . Also subject to Huari influence, this valley was also important as a source of precious materials .
 The container with a funerary effigy is characteristic of the Chavin style . The container was characteristic of a Chavin tradition .
 Ascending the throne of Amentnlep IV, the king changed fw name when he nlroduced the mwiQlbetstk warship of Aten, (he sun god) The king changed his name after the warship was built .
 He founded a new capfid, Akhafalan, but this, like his religion, was abandoned after his death . This, like the religion, abandoned after he died .
 Before 1450, Crete pottery from Crete was imparled into Egypt . In return Asiatic products such as copper and tin were brought in . Pottery and copper were also brought into Egypt in return .
 The Egyptian and Hitlile empires pfoyad key rales in the extensive Mediterranean trade networks of the 2nd midermium . Behind the coast there were other powerful states those of the Assyrians, Babylonians (the ftassite kingdom), Humous (the kingdom
 T he eastern Mediterranean became extremely affluent during the Bronze Age . The eastern Mediterranean was extremely affluent .
 Egypt experienced stability under a central government led by dynasties from Thebes . Egypt's stability was achieved under the rule of Thebes, which was led by a dynasty from the ancient city .
 Dominion over Nubia, which had been lost during the political disintegration of the First Intermediate Period, was restored . It guarantees access to products from the African heartland .
 Royal missions were sent to re-establish diplomatic contacts with Syria and Palestine . The move further encouraged trade in the eastern Mediterranean region .
 In southern Mesopotamia foreign trade was increasingly in the hands of private individuals . Luxury' items such as gold, lapis lazuli, ivory and pearls were exchanged for Mesopotamian textiles, sesame oil and resin .
 Isin and Larsa were early players in the 2nd millennium . Larsa and Isin were involved in a struggle for ascendancy among southern cities .
 Later the city of Babylon under King Hammurabi (r.92-50 bc:} conquered most of the cities of southern Mesopotamia and up the Euphrates to Mari . The city was later conquered by King Hammabi and conquered up to Mari, Mari .
 The Mesopotamian empire was relatively shortlived* It transformed southern Mesopotamia into a single state . The empire was a relatively short-lived empire that lasted for a few years .
 Hammurabi is most famous for his Law ('ode which, although not the earliest known in Mesopotamia p is the first for which w r e have the complete text. p is first to have complete text.'
 In northern Mesopotamia the inhabitants of the core Assyrian city of Asbur were creating trading networks with cities in Anatolia up to 8tX> kilometres away . They established trading outposts to exchange Assyrian textiles and ""annakum"" for silver and gold .
 To the north and east of Mesopotamia there w r ere, by the mid-2nd millennium He, numerous small Human (sometimes called Mi ran iiian) principalities, while the Uittites controlled much of Anaudia . HrmTE expansion and contraction .
 Texts written in wedgeshaped characters of the cuneiform script tell us there were other kingdoms in Anatolia such as Arzawa, Assnwa, Ahhiyawa and Lnkka . But their exact Location is uncertain .
 The Hittites were beset by internal dissension and revolts, and lost much of their extended territory until they were left controlling only central Anatolia . Soon afterwards, however, the Hittite lost control of most of their territory .
 For about a century very little is known about events in Mesopotamia and Anatolia . Mesopotamians are thought to have been the most powerful city in the world .
 In 1480 B c the llurrian kingdoms were united by King Parrattama as the kingdom of Mi tan ni . By 1415 bc the Kassitcs, a people slowly moving into Babylonia, had established dominance in tile area .
 The [(itlitcs once again controlled much of the Anatolian plateau and were heavily involved in Mediterranean tratio . They received commodities such as copper, goid and grain as tribute from the cities under their influence .
 The Egyptians under the Xew' Kingdom dynasties w r ere also expanding . At the same time they were spreading southwards into the Levant .
 Egyptian expansion was predominantly geared towards securing resources from Nubia and West Asia . This was also the time of the greatest Egyptian expansion .
 Thutmose 1 campaigned as far as the Euphrates River, and reclaimed Syria, thus extending the empire to Carchemish . The campaign extended as far north as the River Euphrates .
 Egyptian domination over Palestine and Syria once again lapsed until Sety l recovered Palestine . He also established Egyptian control over Nubia up to the Fourth Cataract .
 He initiated a period of fierce competition with the I Nukes for control of the Levant, which came to a head at the Battle of Qadesh in 1275 BC . Although the Egyptians claimed victory, the Nitrites probably gained the upper hand .
 Soon after this battle the resurgent Assyrians under King Adad-nirari I captured the Mitanniavt capital of Washukanni and established themselves as a power equal to Egypt . In response the llittites formed a pact of non-aggression with the Egyptians that led
 Assyrians were not directly affected by these upheavations and continued to expand . Assyrians continued to live in the region despite the upheavals .
 They invaded Babylon as well as the Levant, where they took advantage of the collapse of the Hittite Empire . They also invaded Babylon and the Levant . The Hittites were defeated by the Babylonians .
 By the close of the 2nd millennium Assyrian dominance was also fading . The kingdom of Elam to the east now became the most powerful player in the region .
 His grave was the only one which archaeologists found largely inlad and it contained, besides hb mommy, an osiounding weollh of grave goods including dismantled chociofs r beds, masks and musical instruments .
 T Die movements of the ""Sea Peoples"" bonds who roamed the Mediterranean during the 13th century er have been reconstructed an the basis of few written sources and little archaeological evidence .
 In Egypt two attacks by these tribes have been documented . Merenpfah withstood on attack an the Nile dello by o united force of Libyans and the Sea Peoples .
 Any returned during the reign of Rameses III {11§4~S3 IC| r attacking by land and sea . Any returned from the . reign of the reigns of Ramees III . attacking by sea and land .
 Egyptian pharaohs triumphantly retarded their victories over the Sea Peoples . They were defeated, bat later some settled peacefully in Egypt, others in Palestine . Egyptian pharoahs exaggerated the threat posed by groups .
 In addition lt. tedar from iheir mountains and purple dye made from local shellfish, they traded topper from Cyprus and other raw maleriak plained from htir colonies in ihear colonies .
 Craft line craft products including glassware and arnomanls carved from Ihe ivory of Syrian elephants are highly sought after . Craft products are also highly sought-after .
 To the south Ihe Phoeniciaa homeland bordered on the newly founded slates ol the Israelites and Ihe Philistines . The latter descended from one group of the "" Sea Peoples"" whu had caused such upheaval in the Mediterranean during the late 2nd millennium If
 Archaeological and textual evidence indicates that there was no longer the vast wealth that had supported the lavish royal lifestyles and military campaigns of the Late Bronze Age . The evidence suggests that there were no longer .
 The empires of the Egyptians, Humans, Hittltes, Elamites and Assyrians no longer held sway over the region . Although major cities remained occupied, major cities were not occupied by major empires .
 If client state failed to provide “gifts* , Assyrians treated this as an act of rebellion and conquered the state . A local ruler was then appointed, or the country was annexed and ruled by a provincial governor .
 This method of domination and control channelled all the tributes of clients and booty of conquered countries into the heartland of Assyria .
 Assyrians acquired an extensive empire but also great Wealth, enabling their rulers to build fabulous palaces, establish several new capitals and commission works of art . The Assyrian empire was one of the largest in the world .
 Levant was one of the main areas to suffer the effects of Assyrian expansion . The Levant suffered from Assyrian invasion .
 The Israelites had settled in Palestine, their traditional ' promised land"", around 1250 ejc (map 2L) A little later, around 1200 BC, the Philistines occupied the adjacent area of Phi list in the area .
 From the lale 9lh century onwards I hey sometimes enslaved and resettled thousands af conquered people in areas lor from their homelands . (r.06-966 BC| expanded the kingdom and chose Jerusalem as its religious and political centre . Jerusalem was chosen as
 Under David and his son Solomon the kingdom prospered . It became an international power and a centre of culture and trade .
 Yclnyo Indian Oeea* 1 4 Assyrian, Nm-Bmyloniah and Widian Empires 7S0-550 K k$ftr\ fmfire t HO K fciyricfl S 80 K taQ&bytacn
 After the Egyptian New Kingdom collapsed around 1069 BC, the country was ruled by two competing dynasties based in the Nile delta and Thebes . Egypt and Assyria were ruled by competing dynasts from both sides .
 A family of local lords established itself as a powerful dynasty, governing from Napata . Napata was ruled by the Napata family .
 When the rulers based in the delta threatened Thebes, the priest of the state god Amun sought the protection of the Nubian king Piy . Piy was granted the title Pharaoh of Egypt by the king of Egypt .
 Piy conquered Thebes and went northwards to put down opposition by the delta rulers . Piy then went further northwards, putting down opposition .
 His successor completed the conquest of Egypt, reversing centuries of Egyptian domination of Nubia . His successor was the Egyptian ruler of the Nubian kingdom .
 Babylon was ruled by a member of the Assyrian royal family as co-king rather than governor of Babylon . Babylon was governed by a royal family member rather than a governor . The Assyrian king was the king of Babylon, not the governor .
 After a number of additional campaigns, they withdrew to leave friendly ‘client kings’ in place . However, they never completely controlled it and, after a series of more campaigns, it never fully controlled it .
 During this period Egyptian culture flourished, with Greek Classical and Hellenistic influences becoming increasingly prominent . Egyptian culture was flourishing during this period, with Egyptian culture becoming more prominent .
 Nabopolassar was succeeded by his son, Nebuchadnezzar . The Medes began their extensive conquest of the Iranian Plateau . The biblical conqueror of the Iran Plateau is known as Nebuchar .
 They adopted a number of ideas from the Assyrians including the use of cuneiform writing . But they had their own distinctive culture and were skilled in working both bronze and iron .
 Hie languishing Gulf trade revived under their auspices, and the resulting wealth and stability enabled Babylonian cultural life to continue, assuring the survival of Mesopotamian cultural traditions .
 Assyrian power grew once again in the late 8th century bc . After gaining control of Babylonia and the Levant, the empire was soon in conflict with Egypt .
 This ftomon marble marble copy of Athena, goddess of wisdom, was based on o stalue by (he Greek sculptor Myron in (he 5th century it. Myron) It was made of marble by Myron .
 The original would have been mode of bronze using the lsKt-wa.se"" technique, o method that enoUed the Greeks to portray the most lifelike ef figures . Outing the Bth and 7th centuries it the Greeks used the technique to ploy
 The Phoenician had ambitions that led to confrontation with rival meccbont force, notably the Phoenicians . However, their ambitions oho led them to confrontation* with rival forces, notably Phoenicians .
 The cultural and political life of Greece, and particularly of Athens, in the 5th century bc was to have a profound impact on Western civization . In Athens the principles of democracy were established and scientific and philosophical reasoning taken to unprecedented heights .
 The tragedies of Sophocles and the comedies of Aristophanes formed a central part of its legacy . The Athenian literary tradition exemplified by the tragedies of . Sophocle and Aristophane .
 Also in Athens* architecture and forms of art such as sculpture and vase painting took on the Classical styles that still influence the Western sense of aesthetics . Architecture and art is still influenced by ancient Greek architecture and art .
 Modem botanical and geological studies reveal a remarkable stability in the Greek countryside during the last 3-4/HX) years* until the recent industrialization of agriculture . Agricultural stability in Greece was found in the mid-2000s .
 Farmers grow labour-intensive crops such as apricots and grapes in the valleys along the coast . They cultivate cereals and olives on the less fertile mountain slopes, and use mountain pastures as grazing land .
 Ancient rural population of Greece practised a similar mixed agriculture* supplemented with marine resources . It is likely that the ancient rural population practiced a similar mix of agriculture* and marine resources.
 The many islands in the Aegean Sea provide secure points for navigation and promote maritime traffic . Crosscountry communication is hindered by the mountains* which leave many areas isolated . The Greek city-states are the most important cities in Greece .
 This functioned as a political administrative and religious centre for the surrounding countryside . It was also a religious and administrative centre for surrounding areas .
 Some city-states expanded their influence and came to dominate . Others remained on a more equal footing with neighbouring cities .
 During the 8th century bc a sense of a Greek identity emerged, primarily based on language and religion . It was expressed in the panHellenic festivals such as the Olympic Gaines and the shared oracles at Delphi and Dodona .
 High-quality agricultural land further separated from each other by mountain* encouraged expansion overseas . These colonies retained the culture and religion of the mother oitic*s, yet in a political sense functioned independently .
 The earliest colonics in Syria and Italy were primarily trading posts . The quest for arable land probably played a key role in the colonization of Sicily and the Black Sea area . Chalcis, Corinth and Miletus were the three main colonizers .
 Darius demanded submission of all the mainland Greek cities, but Athens and Sparta refused . Darius then demanded the submission of the cities of Athens, Sparta and Athens . Darius's death was the death of the king of Sparta .
 Most of the Persian fleet was lost in storms around Mount Athos . Part 1 was after most of the fleet was destroyed . Part 2 was the first part of Part 1 of the series .
 Darius’s successor Xerxes prepared an even larger invasion, to which many of the Greek city-states responded by mounting their first united force, led by Sparta . Infuriated, Xerxes planned an even bigger invasion, leading to Sparta's defeat . Many of the
 Athens knew they could not defeat the Persians on land and so left their city to the enemy, who burned Athens to the ground . The city was destroyed by the enemy in the Persian desert .
 The small and independent Greek city-states had managed to defeat the greatest empire at that time . The small city-state defeated the great empire in that time.
 Athens and Sparta gained tremendous prestige through its contributions to the victory over the Persians . Athens seemed the obvious leader of an anti-Persian pact when Sparta declined to join the pact .
 The main aims of the Delian League were protection against the Persians and seeking compensation for the incurred losses . But the Athenians soon used the alliance to build an empire .
 "They imposed heavy tributes on their allies and punished revolts mercilessly," says French President Francois Hollande . "The French Revolution was founded by the French Revolution in France in 1903, and the French revolution was founded in France .
 Sparta and other Greek cities watched the growth of Athens with suspicion . Sparta was a city of suspicion of the city's growth . The city of Sparta watched its growth with suspicion of Athens .
 The Greeks feared Athens’s military power, but were also wary of democracy, Athens's radical contribution to political innovation . Not only did they fear the military power of Athens, but also they were wary of its radical contributions to democracy .
 Attica suffered famine and plague that killed a quarter of its number, including Pericles . The countryside was sacked annually and the population was withdrawn within the city’s walls . The plague killed Pericles, who was killed by the plague .
 The remains of this late 5th-century temple are at Segesta in Sicily a focal point for Greek trade . The remains were found in the 5th century at the site of a temple in the area .
 Its columns are in the simple Doric style, first of the three major orders of Classical architecture . The progressively more complex and ornate Ionic and Corinthian styles followed later . The columns are the first of three major styles of classical architecture .
 Athenian imperialist policy led to war with Sparta and its Peloponnesian allies described by the historian Thucydides as the most appalling of all the Greek wars .
 Alexander, a military genius, inherited Philip's ambitions as well as his army . He conquered not only the Persian Empire but also lands well beyond . His son Alexander was a charismatic leader and military genius . Alexander's son Alexander died in a battle for the throne .
 His attempts to weld his vast conquests into a unified empire ended with his early death in Babylon at the age of 32 . However, his attempts to forge his vast empire under combined Macedonian and local rulers ended with early death .
 Croesus of Lydia (a country rich in goldmines) saw an opportunity to enlarge his empire to the east . Learning of this, he saw a chance to expand his empire in Lydia .
 Croesus faced Gyrus at Hattusas . He consulted the Delphic oracle, which prophesied that he would destroy a great kingdom . Croesu was confident of his success, and faced his enemy .
 He was said to have been a just ruler who allowed his subjects religious freedom and did not impose excessively harsh taxes .
 Darius organized the empire into 20 provinces or “satrapies” each ruled by one of his relatives . The empire was ruled by his relatives rather than the existing administrative structures .
 To ensure efficient government he created a road network and installed a regular system of taxation based on the gold Daric coin .
 Trade prospered under the Achaemenids, facilitated by the efficient use of coinage . Coinage was used to facilitate trade in ancient times .
 Sophisticated irrigation works using underground water canals and canals increased agricultural productivity . Water canals were used to irrigate agricultural crops .
 The Arabian Sea and the Greek city-states on the coast of Asia Minor revolted . Pasorgadae i inapohs revolted in 17th century .
 The rest of the empire remained intact until it was conquered by Alexander the Great . Alexander's reign lasted until he conquered the rest of his empire in the Persian empire .
 Philip forged a professional army, unified Macedonia and expanded into Illyria and Thrace . Philip also gained control of the Thessaly and expanded his empire . Philip forged Macedonian armies and expanded the empire .
 His expansion met with hostility from Athens and Thebes, whose military power had greatly diminished during the Peloponnesian War . Thebes and Athens had little military power during the war .
 Alexander III joined the remainder of his father’s army in Persian territory . His 20-year-old son Alexander III succeeded him in Macedonia .
 On a narrow coastal plain he dealt the Persians a devastating defeat and captured Darius’s family . Darius's family was captured by the Persian king . Darius died in the Persian desert .
 Alexander’s self-proclaimed status as King of Asia was threatened by rebel satraps in the east . In the east, Alexander was faced by rebels who wanted to take control of the region . Alexander was killed in a battle in the eastern city of Babylon .
 Alexander the Great forged an empire which stretched from Greece to the River Indus . Alexander's empire merged Greek and Oriental cultures and merged cultures . Alexander had forged a vast empire that stretched from the Greek to the Indian Ocean .
 Greek became the common language, and Greek gods were venerated side-by-side with local deities . Greek god was venerated alongside local deities in ancient times .
 Alexander encouraged his generals to marry Persian women, as he himself had done . Both Macedonians and Persians ruled as satraps, and Alexander encouraged them to do so .
 He founded 70 new cities, many called Alexandria, which acted as military but also cultural centres of the new cosmopolitan society . Many of the cities were military and cultural centres, many of them called Alexandria .
 Alexander’s success was rooted in his prowess as a military leader, and in clever propaganda, such as the construction of a myth proclaiming his divinity a belief which he himself seemed to share . Alexander's success was based on his ability to lead a military and personal courage .
 Antigonus of Phrygia, Seleucus of Babylonia, Ptolemy of Egypt, and Antipatros, in charge of Macedonia and Greece, were among the main contenders .
 Macedonia, generally regarded as the seat of legitimate rule, became the centre of continuous conflict . Macedonia is now known as Macedonia, the country's most populous province .
 The graphic detail is modelled on a 4th century bc Hellenistic painting commissioned by Alexander's own generals . It is modelling on a mosaic at the House of the Faun in Pompeii, Pompeii .
 It was created in the late 2nd or early 1st century bc clear evidence of Alexander's enduring reputation among the Romans . Alexander's reputation among Romans remains strong today .
 Greek culture blossomed under Hellenistic rule, usually enriched by indigenous cultures . Even in India, even in the very limit of Alexander's conquests, it had a lasting effect .
 Developments in astronomy, medicine, mathematics and engineering took place alongside patronage of the arts, the building of libraries and education .
 Roman Empire acting as intermediary, these achievements laid the basis for a later European civilization . The Roman Empire acted as intermediary .
 Central to Hinduism are a belief in the transmigration of souls, the worship of many deities and the sanction of strict social stratification, the caste system, and the ability to assimilate rather than exclude different beliefs .
 Most of the local beliefs have a focus on holy vvritings, or scriptures . Most of them continue to flourish today .
 Its sacred writings, the Vedas, were first compiled by seers and priests, or riahis . Vedas were based on myths, legends and hymns passed down from antiquity .
 Buddhism was one of a number of sects that aimed to reform Hinduism . Gautama lived at a time of great religions ferment in India, and Buddhism was among them .
 Another, more extreme, reform movement was Jainism, whose asceticism was a reaction to the rigid ritualism of Hinduism . The asceticist movement was an extreme reaction to Hinduism's rigid rituals .
 Buddhism shared with Hinduism the belief in the cycle of rebirth, but differed in the way in which escape from the cycle could he achieved . Buddhism is a form of Buddhism, but not a means of escape from rebirth .
 The appearance of Buddhism stimulated a resurgence in Hinduism, which may be why Buddhism failed to take a permanent hold in India, ¥ Several founders of world .
 Zoroaster believed that the end of the world was imminent, and that only the righteous would survive the great conflagration to share in the new creation . Zoroaster was Zoroaster's master .
 The teachings of Judaism form the Old Testament of the Bible; in addition, Jewish law is recorded in the Talmud . The first codification of Jewish law was the Mishnah .
 Christianity developed from Judaic roots . Named after its founding figure, Jesus Christ . Christianity developed as a religion .
 Christians believe in one God and that Jesus, born in Bethlehem, is the Son of God the Messiah . Jesus' arrival on Earth had long been promised in the Jewish tradition .
 Jesus’s radical teachings and disregard for the establishment led to his death by crucifixion, an event Christians believe he overcame in the Resurrection . Christians believe that he overcame the Resurrection in the resurrection .
 In the first few centuries ad, Christianity flourished in many parts of the Roman world . Christ’s teachings (written down in the New Testament) spread by apostolic figures such as Paul of Tarsus .
 Two philosophical traditions were dominant in China when Buddhist monks arrived there in the 4th century ad. Confucianism and Daoism were dominant .
 Confucianism, named after the author of the Classics, Kongzi, or Confucius, propounded a set of morals encouraging a way of life ruled by the principles of order, hierarchy and respect .
 Confucius worked for much of his career as an administrator in one of the Warring States . His ideas subsequently greatly influenced political philosophy in China and many other parts of East Asia . Confuccius' ideas have since greatly influenced East Asia and China .
 The other tradition, Daoism, or ‘the Way’, called for people to find ways of being in harmony with the world .
 Certain mountains were considered especially sacred and became the focus of worship . In its combination of cosmology and the sanctification of nature, certain mountains were especially sacred .
 Zoroastrianism had a major impact on the development on many other religious traditions, including Judaism and Christianity . Zoroastrians are Zoroastrians . The religion is named after him . It is believed to be the oldest religion in existence .
 Zoroastrian belief is that life is a constant struggle between good and evil . The Avesta is based on the Avestan scriptures, which set out the belief that evil is evil . Zoroastrians believe life is always a struggle between evil and good .
 Zoroaster rejected the pantheism of the Indolranian religions and proclaimed one of the ancient deities, Ahura Mazda as the one supreme god . Zoroaster rejects the Pantheism .
 By ad 64 Nero used Christians as victims in the imperial arenas . Diocletian organized campaigns against them in the early 4th century .
 Diocletian's successor Constantine legalized Christianity, and at the first ""Ecumenical Council"" (held at Nicaea in 325) he brought church and state together . Constantine legalized the religion, and brought state and church together .
 Constantine converted to Christianity after a key victory over his rivals in 312 . Constantine ascribed to the power invested in him as the servant of the Highest Divinity, which he equated with the Christian god .
 Many sects emerged during the early spread of Christianity, and councils were held to discuss doctrinal disagreements raised with some sects declared heretical as a result . Some sects were declared heretic and some were later declared as heretical .
 Between 66 and 73 rebellion against Roman rule broke out, but the empire reconquered Jerusalem in 70, destroying the Jewish temple . In 70, the Roman Empire destroyed the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem .
 Strong rulers such as the earty Mouryas and the Guptas succeeded in uniting large areas to form empires, but weak successors were unable to bold them together . Strong rulers like the eartry Mourya succeeded in . uniting . large areas .
 Most readily adopted Indian culture, settling in towns such as Toksosik [Taxila j or Mathura, converting ta Buddhism or other Indian religions .
 Indo-Aryan nomads were the first of many groups from Iran or Central Asia to invade the Indian subcontinent .
 Neither Persians nor Greeks ever penetrated deeper into the subcontinent, due to the strength of native dynasties . However, neither Persians or Greeks ever penetrate deeper into India .
 Magadha was a centre for control of riverbome trade and of the sources of raw materials such as iron . The city was strategically positioned for control over river trade and iron trade .
 From the 5th century onwards, the north was prey to attacks by the ferocious Hunas who swept in from the east . The Hunas were the first to attack the north from the north .
 By the time they reached the Ganges Valley or the Deccan, the force of foreign invasions was spent, and Sri Lanka and the south were generally spared . Sri Lanka, the south and the east of India, were spared .
 They suffered periodic attacks by native groups such as the Mauryans, Tamils and Guptas . Instead they suffered from periodic attacks from native groups .
 In the 4th century AD the Guptas ruled a small kingdom in the Ganges region . They gained control of adjacent regions through military conquest, diplomacy and dynastic marriages .
 Unlike the earlier Mauryan Empire, they established only indirect political authority over much of this area . Local rulers usually acted under their suzerainty, acting under them .
 Much of the subcontinent, such as the jungle regions, was unsuited to agriculture and was inhabited by huntergatherers . The jungle regions were unsuited for agriculture and were inhabited by hunters .
 In addition to the wild produce they collected for their own needs, they obtained materials for settled farmers, such as honey, venison and lac . They exchanged these for cultivated foodstuffs and manufactured goods .
 Rice was the main staple in the east and Sri Lanka, millet in the south and wheat in the north . Animals, particularly cattle, were kept .
 Rulers particularly the Mauryas, who exercised strong centralized control over their realms also encouraged the cultivation of wasteland, often by the forced resettlement of groups of low-castes .
 Land taxes and levies on produce provided the main income for states throughout the period . Trade also yielded considerable revenues for states .
 Small era ft enterprises developed info major industries, generally under the control of caste-based guilds . Small-scale industries were generally controlled by caste-free trade .
 Jtppgnto &HwmviidhQno Gnyo Nondriwdhorw^ ^imonpvro Vohqgulmci Jo$di Supparotga Prafiuhana .
 Asia acted as an entrepot between Chinn and India . In additii>n , Sc>u i hcast Asia acted in the 1930s .
 China also traded overland along the Silk Road, which skirted the deserts of Central Asia . From north India Chinese goods were carried through Persia or hy sea to Rome's principal port .
 These land and sea routes also carried Indian religious to the lands of the east .
 They rejected Brahminieai Hindu orthodoxy, including the caste system, and were enthusiastically adopted by the lower castes, merchants and craftsmen . The Hinduism was rejected by Brahminiaai Hindus .
 Buddhism rapidly became the dominant religion in north India . Ashoka sent a Buddhist mission to Sri Lanka, where King Devanampiya Tissa became an ardent convert, establishing a Buddhist realm which has endured until today .
 Simple complexes of monastic cells grew hy the early centuries into substantial monasteries . Monasteries were richly endowed hy royalty, merchants and guilds .
 Buddhism gradually withered away in the country' of its hirth hut remained vigorous In Sri Lanka, China . Buddhism gradually waned away in Sri Lanka .
 Chinese pilgrims were visiting the Indian vjbtontinent to jidy or igioal duununK and to worship ad offer gifa al shrines such m that of ibe Buddha's loath an the bland af Sri Lanka . Asio by iMufeafe
 By the late 5th century power was concentrated in seven principal states . Han, Wei, Zhao, Qin, Chu, Chu and Qi were the principal states of China .
 They all built enormous walls to protect their borders, fortified their cities and even their villages, and constructed roads and canals to expedite the movement of troops and supplies .
 The conquests in Central Asia of the Hon emperor Wu Di and his embassies to the west opened up a major trade route linking East and West . Wu Di was the first Chinese emperor to conquer Central Asia .
 Merchant caravans took Chinese goods as far as the Roman Empire in exchange for Western luxury goods . The Chinese trade is believed to date back to the Roman era .
 Documents from northwestern China and along this ""Silk Rood"" record the everyday life in garrison towns . Well-preserved documents from northwest China .
 The Zhou, possibly descended from nomads, established their royal capital at Hao in their ancestral heartland in the Wei River valley . The first Chinese dynasties The Zhou established their . royal capital in Hao .
 Despite the continued claim of Zhou kings to the Mandate of Heaven, real power slipped away to a multitude of regional states . Zhou kings continued to claim to the mandate of heaven .
 Zheng had reformed Qin, replacing the old kinship-based government with an efficient bureaucratic state . Zheng had replaced Qin with a new bureaucratic state of the Qin state .
 Proclaiming himself Shi Huang Di, ‘the First Emperor’, he established his new capital at Xianyang . Proclaimed to be the first Emperor of China and established his capital at the city .
 It boasted wide boulevards, immense walls and gates, religious buildings, palaces and pleasure gardens . Famed for its towers, it boasted wide Boulevards and immense walls .
 By ad 2, the date of the first national census, China had a recorded population of 57 million . China's population of 56 million was recorded in the first census .
 Two million people resettled in colonies in the north and northwest of the Chinese empire . This huge number was often mobilized for warfare or vast public works .
 Much of north China, traditionally the centre of power, was depopulated . However, the later part of the Han dynasty saw a major movement of population southwards . The process was precipitated by a shift in the course of the Huang He River .
 The art of war in early China involved mass population movements . Mass population movements occurred in a country unified through major developments in the art of warfare .
 Under the warlords of the Warring States, both individual gallantry and mass brutality were displayed, and armies became professional . Under the Warrings States, the warlord's armies became professionally professional .
 From the 6th century BC new weapons, notably iron swords and armour, had replaced the traditional bronze halberds . New weapons were replaced by iron swords, including armour and armour .
 Cavalry outmanoeuvred chariots on the battlefield and the new cities became targets for siege warfare . The new cities were the targets of siege warfare.
 Zhao stronghold of Jinyang was besieged for a year before the attackers turned on each other in a classic piece of Warring States treachery . The Zhao stronghold was besieged by the Zhao for more than a year in a year .
 From the 5th century BC the states built pounded-earth walls along their frontiers . The walls were built along the frontiers of many of the states .
 The Qin and Han were aggressively expansionist . They mounted expeditions against the nomadic ‘barbarian non-Chinese’
 Shi Huang Di joined sections of walled defences earlier states had built, thus creating the Great Wall . To keep the nomads out of his new empire, Shi Huang di joined the sections of walls built earlier states .
 The nomads often had to be bought off as much as driven away by force, as shown by Chinese treasures from the tomb of the Xiongnu chief at Noin Ula . The Chinese treasures were found in the tomb .
 Under Han, military expansion was backed up by a programme of colonization . Commanderies were set up in areas as farflung as modern Korea and Vietnam .
 Many modern Chinese cities are built on foundations laid in the Zhou period . The earliest Chinese coins, miniature bronze knives and spades come from Zhou cities .
 Agricultural productivity was increased by government reforms and the use of more efficient tools, especially new ploughs made of iron . Agricultural productivity increased by . government reforms .
 Politics and the end of the Han Empire were the focus of the Warring States . A political philosophy developed that recognized the uplifting nature of public life but also viewed politics as corrupting .
 Confucius was perhaps the most influential of all Chinese philosophers and his Reformist successors, which placed emphasis on virtue and fair government . Clashes resonate throughout the history of the early Chinese empires .
 Unlike their predecessors, rulers were bound more by codes of human conduct than the demands of the spirits .
 It was, however, peasant revolts inspired by messianic beliefs, often drawing on Daoism, that disrupted and weakened the Han Empire towards the end of its life .
 The massive mausoleum of Shi Huang Di, ""the First Emperor"", is located at the Qin capital of Xianyong (later Chang'an under the Han dynasty), took 700,000 conscripted labourers 35 years .
 The life-size terracotta soldiers pictured here were among the 7,500 that guarded the vast burial pits surrounding the elaborate tomb .
 While rice, millet and wheat were the staples of Han agriculture, supplemented by vegetables, many areas also produced other commodities such as timber or fruit .
 Hemp was grown to make clothing for the majority, while silk supplied the elite . Silk was used to make clothes for the elite, while hemp was grown for the rest of the world .
 Iron was produced from the 6th century bc and was used for the majority of tools and weapons . Iron was also used in the creation of the Iron Age of Iron Age .
 Salt production was another major industry, obtained from the sea in coastal regions but elsewhere mined from brine deposits often found deep underground . Salt was obtained from sea, but also mined from deep underground deposits .
 Horses and wheeled transport allowed people to exploit areas where pasture was too sparse to support herds in one place all the year round . Horses were used to transport people around the world from their homes .
 People took up nomadic existence, moving with herds with their herds . Encouraged partly by changes in climate and vegetation, people took up a nomadic lifestyle .
 These animals, formerly kept for meat, were now mainly reared for milk which was made into a variety of foods, including cheese, yoghurt and fermented drinks . The animals were reared mainly for milk, rather than meat .
 They probably included Tocharian speakers in the Tarim Basin, where there have been finds of desiccated mummies of individuals with a strongly European appearance .
 In West Asia, texts that include Indo-European terms identify non-Indo-European-speaking groups, including the leaders of the non-indo-Europeanspeaking Mitanni . The Mitanni are a non-speaking Mitanni, a group of people who speak of
 Central Asia is a vast arid zone of steppe grasslands, looming mountains and inhospitable deserts . C entral Asia is an arid region of steppppies and deserts .
 Later inhabitants such as the Persians (later 1st millennium bc) and Sasanians devised more complex underground irrigation canals which again brought prosperity to the region .
 Up to the 5th millennium BC settlements scattered along the rivers of Central Asia . Up to 5th century BC settlements were scattered along rivers of central Asia .
 These often consisted of partially subterranean houses . They were home to small groups of hunter-gatherers who caught fish and a variety of game .
 By 4500 BC small permanent communities had appeared in favoured regions of Central Asia on the margins of Europe and West Asia, growing crops and, more particularly, herding livestock . Settlement and pastoralism began in 4500BC .
 Some of these were among the first to domesticate the horse, initially for meat . Some of the horses were later domesticated for meat, and some of them were later used to be meat .
 By 2000 BC the chariot dominated battlefields from Mesopotamia to China . The chariot was used in the 4th millennium BC, and by 2000 BC it had been dominant .
 The introduction of the spoked wheel (replacing the heavy solid wheel) made these vehicles much more manoeuvrable . Spoked wheel was introduced in the 1930s . Spoke wheel was replaced with a spoke wheel .
 Horse-riding was first adopted around 2000 BC by peoples dwelling north of the Caspian Sea . Horse riding was first used by peoples living north of Caspians .
 By 1000 BC full nomadic pastoralism had developed, from which emerged the horse-riding warriors who were to become the scourge of the Classical world . From 1000 BC, nomadic nomadic warriors were to emerge as the scourge .
 The origins of Indo-European speakers are still a matter of heated debate . Many scholars would now place them among groups dwelling between the Black Sea and Caspian Sea in 4th and 3rd millennia bc .
 These are archaeologically identififed as the Srubnaya and Andronovo cultures and their predecessors . They are also known as the Andronovans and Srubnian cultures .
 Indo-European languages were spoken in Europe as well as much of West Asia, Iran, South Asia and parts of Central Asia . By the beginning of the 1st millennium, Indo-Europe was spoken in many of the world's regions .
 By the 1st millennium bc a fusion of nomadic and sedentary cultures gave rise to several kingdoms in southwestern Central Asia . By the mid-6th century bc bc were largely under Persian control of the region .
 The Achaemenid kings of the Persian Empire built roads, fortified cities and developed irrigation systems . The influence of Persian culture was felt deep into Central Asia .
 Graeco-Bactrian kings were the first to establish links across Central Asia with China . They were the earliest to establish trade links with China in Central Asia .
 In the later centuries bc a series of powerful confederacies emerged among the nomad peoples . The nomad people were nomadic nomads .
 These nomad groups buried their elite in great mounds such as those at Noin Ula, Pazyryk and Kul Oba .
 Horses, central to the nomadic way of life, often played a major role in burial rituals . Gold and silver and lavishly decorated textiles, some of which have been marvellously preserved in the frozen conditions of the tundra .
 Such rich burials are described by the Greek historian Herodotus, whose accounts closely match the archaeological finds . The findings have been found in a series of burial sites in the region .
 These nomads wore highly decorated clothes and ornamented their bodies with tattoos . The nomads were also known for their highly decorated clothing .
 Hemp was not only used for textiles but also smoked, as evidenced by remains of smoking paraphernalia . Hemp was also used to make textiles and was used for smoking .
 Stringed instruments also found in the tombs attest to a love of music and song .
 Originating on the Mongolian plateau, they conquered and ruled the oasis cities of the Turfan Basin in the 2nd century bc. They ruled and ruled oases cities in the two-century-old Turfan .
 Xiongnu expansion drove other nomad groups further west, including the Yuezhi, who settled on the Oxus River . Xionnn expansion drove Xiongnans further west .
 Xiongnu and other nomad peoples developed a distinctive culture, marked particularly by a splendid tradition of zoomorphic art . The Xiongnis developed a distinct culture .
 Other shared practices included binding children’s heads in infancy to produce an elongated shape . Other practices were also shared practices including binding children's heads .
 Sarmatian cavalry were formidable opponents of the Romans . They developed major innovations in equestrian and military equipment, such as the composite bow or the scalearmour .
 From the 1st millennium bc substantial population movements took place in the steppe region . The steppe steppe is now known as the steppeland steppia .
 Groups often spilled over into adjacent settled lands, laying waste in some cases laying waste settled communities before being driven off, as with the 8th-century incursions of the Cimmerians into West Asia .
 Sometimes the invaders settled and became incorporated into the civilization of the lands they overran . The Sakas and Kushans in South Asia, for example, were incorporated into their civilization . Sometimes they settled and become incorporated into civilization .
 China successfully resisted many nomad incursions partly by erecting massive defences that culminated in the Great Wall . China's western provinces fell for a period to the might of the Xiongnu nomads .
 Hephtalites overran the Sasanian Empire and laid waste the cities of northern India . One branch entered Europe in the 5th century, briefly wreaking havoc under Attila, while another entered India in the 6th century .
 The drums were placed in elite burials and probably had a ritual significance . The drums are believed to have been used in ritual ceremonies .
 Made using a lost wax"" casting technique, they were widely distributed and reached the islands of Southeast Asia, where metallurgy was also being practised . Made using the lost wax "" casting technique .
 By the 2nd century bc the area was linked to both India and China by sea routes which were used by Hindu Brahmin priests and Buddhist missionaries as well as merchants .
 Buddhist and Hindu states were established in the region . New ideas of astronomy, art, science, medicine, government and religion spread .
 The remains of a major Funan trading city have been excavated at Oc Eo . The remains have been found at the site of the Funan city of Funan .
 Xiongnu nomads made Yuezhi king’s skull into a drinking cup . The skull was made in the early 2nd century bc by the Xiongn nomads .
 Zhang Qian reached the Yuezhi in the Oxus Valley . Zhang Qian failed to persuade them to renew their conflict with the Xiongnu . He took back to China detailed accounts of the lands he visited .
 For a time the Chinese controlled this ‘Silk Road’ through Central Asia, establishing the Western Regions Protectorate with garrisons in the caravan towns . The area was always menaced and often controlled by barbarian groups such as the Wusun and, especially, the
 Silk Road trade took Chinese silks (a prized commodity in the Roman Empire) and other luxuries to India and then to the markets of the West . Dependent largely on the hardy Bactrian camel, the trade was largely dependent on the camel trade .
 Many Roman manufactured goods found their way to China, along with the highly valued horses of Ferghana, gems from India, grapes, saffron, beans and pomegranates from Central Asia . In exchange, many Roman products were found to be found in China .
 A number of possible routes linked China and the West . Political and military factors were also important in determining which routes were in use at any time .
 The oasis towns along the Silk Road rose and fell in prosperity with the fluctuating importance of the various routes . Oasis towns in the region rose to prominence with the rise of Silk Road .
 By the 2nd century bc, sea routes linking India with China via Southeast Asia were also in common use .
 While Indian literature makes only vague references to trade with Southeast Asia, finds of Indian beads and Western objects in the region such as Roman coins and cut gems in south Indian sites attest to the region's contacts with India .
 Riverborne trade linked China and mainland Southeast Asia during the 1st millennium BC . Sea traffic developed during the period of the Han Empire, during the Han period .
 At this time, the area to its south was probably home to a number of small independent chiefdoms united in opposition to Chinese territorial aggression .
 Regular seaborne trade took place in the Gulf . Sumerians trading directly with the Indus civilization . Oman and Makran and the seafaring traders of Bahrain also traded .
 Egypt was economically involved with Nubia to its south along the River Nile . Seaborne expeditions through the Red Sea were mounted by Egypt to bring back exotic materials from the Land of Punt .
 In subsequent centuries the rise and fall of Mediterranean, western Asiatic and Indian Ocean states and cultures brought a variety of participants into this network . Persians, Phoenicians and Greeks were among those who entered the network .
 By the 1st millennium BC both Arabians and Indians were familiar with, and exploiting, the monsoon winds to cross the Indian Ocean .
 These winds carried them east in the summer, down the Red Sea and across to India . The northeast monsoon in the autumn carried vessels westward from India and down the African coast .
 It was not until the final centuries BC that the Greeks and Romans also became acquainted with the monsoon winds .
 A Greek sailing manual of around 60 AD, The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea, has provided a wealth of information on trade in this area . A Greek sail manual has been published since 60 AD .
 Some expeditions travelled south as far as Rhapta on the coast of East Africa, obtaining ivory, tortoise-shell and incense a round trip of two years because of the timing of the winds .
 Others made the more dangerous ocean crossing to India, where they exchanged gold, wine, manufactured goods and raw materials for gems and gems .
 On the return journey they would stop at Kane and Muza to obtain frankincense and myrrh, reaching Alexandria within a year of departure .
 Other Indian Ocean traders dealt in everyday commodities such as grain, foodstuffs and ordinary textiles . Unlike the Romans, other traders traded in low-bulk commodities .
 A variety of routes linked the countries of Asia, East Africa and the Mediterranean . The routes included routes to East Africa, Asia and the Middle East .
 Long-established routes through the Gulf and across the Iranian Plateau flourished during the 1st millennium bc under the Achaemenids .
 From the 2nd century bc the newly established Chinese trade route across Central Asia linked with these existing routes . Arabs and Indians operated sea trade across the Indian Ocean, and desert caravans carried incense from southern Arabia via the Nabataean state to Rome .
 Chinese goods reached India via the Silk Road and indirectly by sea via Southeast Asia . From here they were taken by Roman shipping across the Indian Ocean, along with Indian goods .
 The Axumite kingdom benefited from this shift, becoming a major producer of incense . Arab states that had operated overland caravans declined as the overland trade declined .
 MGE5IA V SUPtR^y -^edqnia Vlart*> A Skilful political manoeuvring helped Octavian to secure victory over his rivals in the struggle to succeed his uncle Julius Caesar . Octavicius was victorious in the battle to
 Augustus used his position of supreme power well, enacting a raft of important legal, economic, social and administrative reforms, reviving traditional religious beliefs, encouraging the arts, and constructing and restoring many public buildings in Rome . Augustus died in August 31, at the age of 50 .
 Roman culture also spread to lands beyond the imperial frontier, influencing among others the Germanic barbarians who later overran the empire . Many of Roman culture's traditions and institutions, notably ihr ou gh the medium of the Christian Church, are still alive today .
 Throughout Rome’s mighty empire, science was applied for utilitarian ends, from underfloor heating to watermills, aqueducts and an impressive road network . Science was applied to utilitarian ends throughout Rome's mighty empire .
 Rome bequeathed to posterity its efficient administration, codified laws, widespread literacy and a universally understood language . Rome was known for its efficiency administration and widespread literacy .
 It also adopted and spread Christianity, for which it provided the institutional base . It also provided an institutional base for spreading Christianity .
 Rome developed in the 7th and 6th centuries bc from a number of settlements spread over seven low, flattopped hills . The city of Rome developed from a series of settlements in the hills of Rome .
 To strengthen its grip on the conquered territory, colonies were founded and settled by both Roman citizens and Latin allies . The colonies were established by Roman citizens as well as Roman allies .
 Swift access to colonies was provided by an extensive road network, created from the late 4th century bc and greatly extended during the 2nd century bc . Swift access was provided to these colonies by a network of road networks, created in the 4th Century bc .
 First confrontation outside Italy was against the Carthaginians, who saw their commercial interests in Sicily threatened by Rome’s expansion . The first confrontation outside of Italy was in Rome's first confrontation with Carthaginian .
 During the three Punic Wars Rome seized territory formerly held by the Carthaginians (Sardinia, Corsica, Spain and the tip of northern Africa), but also suffered its worst defeats . Rome seized the territory previously held by Carthaginian but suffered worst losses .
 Greek culture began to exert a powerful influence on Roman life and art . As a result, Greek culture was influential in Roman culture and art, the Roman Empire .
 The newly acquired provinces (map 1) created the opportunity for individuals to make a fortune and forge a loyal army . They created the chance to make the opportunity to forge a fortune .
 Pompey conquered Syria, Cilicia, llithynia and Pontus . Julius Caesar annexed Gaul and expanded the African province of Gaul . Pompey was one of the new powerful commanders .
 Caesar’s influence had grown to such a . extent that the Senate saw its position threatened and ordered him to disband his army in 49 bc. Caesar's influence grew to such an extent that he was ordered to disband the army .
 Caesar's adoptive son Octavian officially restored the Senate’s powers . He nominally took up the position of princeps while gradually increasing his authority . Caesar’ adoptive son Octoberavian became the princeps .
 In 27 bc he was awarded the title ‘Augustus’ , and this date is usually taken as the start of the imperial period . This date is thought to have been the beginning of the Roman Empire .
 Augustus’s reign brought a period of peace and stability, the so-called Pax Romana, which would last until ad 180 . Augustus's reign ended in a state of stability until the end of the Pax Romano . Augustus was the first Roman king to reign in Rome .
 Augustus conquered the entire area up to the River Danube, which, together with the River Rhine, formed his northern border . Augustus ruled the area until the end of the first century .
 In the east the frontier was less well defined and was controlled more by political means, such as alliances with neighbouring kingdoms . The frontier in the east was more defined and controlled by alliances with neighbours .
 Augustus also annexed Egypt, Judaea and Galatia . Augustus also reorganized the legions left by his predecessors . Augustus kept a firm grip on those provinces that required a military presence by awarding them imperial provinces .
 The emperor appointed governors for these provinces, while the Senate selected the governors for the others . The emperor himself appointed the governors .
 Claudius annexed Mauretania, Thrace, Lyciaand parts of Britain, w hile Vespasian conquered the ‘Agriuntates’ region .
 Under Trajan the empire reached its maximum extent, ineluding Arabia and Dacia by 106 . The empire was ineluded by 106 years of Roman rule .
 Under Diocletian the empire was divided into Eastern and Western parts . The provinces were replaced by a massive new bureaucracy and the army was greatly extended . The empire was ruled by an "" Augustus' Augustus' 1 Augustus .
 During the reign of Augustus trade become Rome's lifeline . To feed its ropidly expanding urban population, ii depended on the import af com fat from Sicily, later from Africa and Egypt . The teles of Rome's ""nouveau* rides' luxury goods were imported
 By the 350s, long-term processes of social and economic chonge (largely the product of extensive contacts with the Roman Empire) had created a smaller number of much more powerful groupings .
 Of these the Gotones, then based in Poland, would have the biggest impact on Rome and its European dominions . The Gotones were based in Rome and had the biggest influence on Rome .
 Roman Empire suffered frequent small-scale raids along its European frontier, but major invasions were rare . The Roman Empire was founded in the Roman Roman Empire .
 The first large-scale invasion of the Roman Empire did not occur until the 160s . The movement of Gothic and other Germanic groups from northern Poland towards the Black Sea led to the Marcomannic War .
 Another time of turmoil followed in the mid-3rd century, associated with Goths, Herules and others in the east and Franks and Alemanni in the west . The Goths and Herules were associated with each other .
 Archaeologically, the eastward moves are mirrored in the creation and spread of the Goth-dominated Gernjachov Culture in the later 3rd century . The eastward move is mirrored by the spread of Goth- dominated culture .
 None of this amounts to a picture of constant pressure on the Roman Empire, however, says historian .
 Relations between the Roman empire and the peoples beyond its borders were not all confined to skirmishing and warfare . The Romans regarded the people outside its borders as uncivilized ‘barbarians’
 Numerous individual Germans served in Roman armies . Roman diplomatic subsidies supported favoured Germanic rulers . Numerous individual Germanic soldiers served in the Roman army .
 Some important trading routes operated, such as the famous amber route to the Baltic . There was a steady flow of materials and labour across the border .
 New sources of wealth and the struggle to control them resulted in the social, economic and political transformation of the Germanic world . The struggle for control of these sources led to the rise of wealth in Germany .
 By the 4th century the many small-scale political units, which had relatively egalitarian social structures, had evolved into fewer, larger and more powerful associations . The social elite was dominated by a social elite based on inherited wealth .
 Alemanni seeking to annex Roman territory in 350s and dictate diplomatic terms . None had the power to stand up to the empire on their own, but neither was Roman domination of them total .
 Two admitted groups became embroiled in six years of warfare with the Roman Empire . Goodwill was lacking on both sides, however, and the two admitted groups were involved in 6 years of war .
 The Goths under the leadership of Athanaric had forced Sarmatians onto Roman soil . Taifali barbarians had crossed the Danube to be defeated in 377, and numerous groups of Alans had begun to move west, some being recruited into the Roman army in
 The Visigoths were reinforced by the former followers of Radagaisus to create the Visigoth . They were reinforced in the creation of the Visicoths .
 During this period the Vandals and Alans, now united under Geiseric, seized the rich lands of North Africa, while eastern Britain fell decisively under the sway of the invaders .
 The losses in Britain, Aquitaine, Spain and North Africa fundamentally eroded the power of the Western Empire . The Empire's loss of power eroded the British Empire .
 The country maintained itself by taxing agricultural production, so that losses of land meant losses of revenue .
 Tax-raising in northern Gaul was periodically disrupted by Franks and others . Tax-raking in Gaul was disrupted by the Franks and other .
 The collapse of Hunnic power in the 450s heralded Roman imperial collapse . Roman imperial failure heralded the collapse of the Hunnic state .
 New kingdoms quickly emerged around the Visigoths in southwestern Gaul and Spain . Burgundians in the Rhone Valley had been resettled by Romans in the 430s after being mauled by Huns .
 Lombards and Gepids took territories in the middle Danube . Theoderic the Amal united Gothic renegades from the Hunnic Empire with other Goths serving in the Eastern Roman army .
 The Ostrogoths had conquered the whole of Italy by 493 . This new force, known as the Ostrogoth, had conquered Italy by the end of the century .
 To protect their estates, many local Roman landowners decided to come to terms with the invaders, with the result that the successor kingdoms all acquired some important vestiges of Roman institutions .
 In the 6th century Frankish kingdom grew apace, the Ostrogoths were destroyed by the Byzantine emperor Justinian . The rise of the Avars prompted the Lombards to invade northern Italy in 568 .
 Over the next thousand years the spread of intensive food production enabled their numbers to continue rising and the area to become more densely occupied . Over the years, the population of the animals increased and the population grew .
 As a result, states and empires and other complex forms of socioeconomic organization developed in almost every continent . States and empires developed in many of the world's continents .
 Foremost in terms of wealth, population and technological achievement was China . China was the most populous country in the world in the 1950s .
 Riding eastwards end westwards from Central Asia, they frequently raided the lands af permanently settled peoples who increasingly used the plough la cultivate their fields .
 A nuni her of intensive methods of cultivation had been developed before 500 years ago . A number of intensive techniques were developed in the early 500 years .
 At the same time new intensive farming regimes were developed which tackled the problem of sustaini tig soi 1 terti 1 ity i n the face of coniinuous use . At the . same time the . issue was developed .
 In medieval Europe an unprecedented level of central planning evolved, based on the manor . The manor was a central hub for central planning in medieval Europe .
 This made possible economies of scale in the use of expensive items (such as draught animals and iron tools) and the implementation of a new strategy for raising production while maintaining fertility .
 Wheat was grown in one year, beans and other legumes to restore nitrogen to the soil were grown in the next, and the land was allowed to lie fallow in the third year .
 Where a figure seems to have reached its optimum under a precise set of environmental conditions, a period of depletion often followed . The figure often reaches its peak under precise conditions, such as environmental conditions .
 In Mesoamerica, the population dropped dramatically from almost five million in the Yucatan Peninsula alone . The “Maya Collapse” of the 9th century, when the population . dropped dramatically, can at least partly be attributed to degradation of the land .
 In western Europe it is possible that the impact of the Black Death which reduced the population by between a quarter and a half may have been intensified because numbers had in places already passed the point of sustainability .
 The Black Death was seen by the Christian population of Europe as God’s punishment for their sins . The Christian population saw the Black Death as God's punishment .
 Christianity won an increasing number of adherents in Europe during the medieval period . Buddhism spread to East and Southeast Asia, while Christianity won a growing number of followers .
 In India, the land of Buddhism’s birth, Hinduism revived, particularly in the south . Hinduism is revived in India, especially in the southern states .
 In the 630s the new religion of Islam emerged in the Arabian Peninsula . Through military conquest, Islam rapidly took hold of the Middle East, North Africa and parts of Europe .
 It reached the limits of its westward expansion in 732, when a Muslim army was defeated at Poitiers in central France .
 Over the following centuries the states and empires of Islam frequently inflicted defeats on Christendom . However, over the years, the Islamic state of Islam inflicted many defeats on Christianity .
 The Mamluks of Egypt and Syria completed their recapture of the Holy Land from the Latin Church in the 13th century . In 1453 the Ottoman Turks finally succeeded in capturing Constantinople capital of the Orthodox Church .
 Islam eclipsed Zoroastrianism in southwest Asia, pushed Hinduism back in India from the 1190s, and spread into Central Asia through the conversion of the Mongols from the late 13th century . Islam also eclipses Zoroastrians and pushed back Hinduism from India from
 By 1500 only a tiny proportion of the worlds population lived in large cities . By 1500, only a fraction of the world's population had large cities like large cities.
 In Europe, just three million out of an estimated total of 80 million lived in cities with over 10,000 inhabitants . Just three million of Europe's 80 million live in cities that have more than ten,000 people .
 The characteristic form of medieval urbanism everywhere was the modest market town, evolved as a service centre for the local agricultural economy . Market towns evolved as service centres for local agricultural economies .
 It was a place where surplus crops could be exchanged for other foodstuffs and goods, making it possible to grow a wider range of crops suited to local soils . It was also a place to exchange surplus crops for other goods and goods .
 It was also home to a variety of specialist craftsmen, whose wares were made for sale to the rural population .
 From the 10th century it was made more productive in Europe partly by the introduction af the three-year rotolion system and improvements in the design of the plough .
 ihe pattern of life continued much os it always had, dictated by the seasons . However, ihe patterns continued much of the time .
 Hangzhou became a symbol of a golden age In China's history . With its estimated population af one and a half million, Hangzhou was a symbol .
 In the ancient world much effort was devoted to building and adorning cultural and ceremonial capitals such as Babylon, Athens, Rome and Constantinople . Babylon was one of the world's most famous cultural capitals .
 The medieval period too saw the construction and expansion of such cities . Medieval period also saw construction of similar cities .
 Chang’an was adopted by the Tang dynasty as their capital in China . It was developed to cover an area of 77 square kilometres with a population of about one million in the 7th century . Chang'an was the capital of the Tang Dynasty .
 Muslims oversaw the development of some of Europe’s largest cities at this time . Cordoba and Seville in Spain and Palermo in Sicily were some of the most important cities .
 It was not until the 12th century that the towns of Latin Christendom really began to grow . The larger among them such as Paris and Cologne built magnificent churches, town halls and palaces . Paris was the largest among them, building magnificent churches .
 A Steles ortd empire toatfnyed te rise mi fait in the medieval period . Ocen n NAHVf AMfftJCANS Trople of Cflpo »rn .
 Eurcsra in 1200 were overwhelmed by the destructive conquests of the Mongols in thel3lh century . Many of the cities were destroyed by the Mongol conquests .
 Emperor Justinian I attempted to recreate the Roman Empire of the dth (eatery) before it was divided into Eastern aad Western parts . Justinian was the first Emperor to attempt to recreate a Roman Empire .
 Among his conquests were Italy, where he adopted the city of Ravenna as the imperial capital and did much to adorn it .
 6th century mosaic In the Church of Son Vitale shows the Empress Theodora with her attendants .
 The development of market towns was a sign of growing sophistication in rural economies . specialization and exchange (developed in many pans of Asia, Europe, Mcsoamerica and South America well hefore 500) replaced selfsufficiency as the basis of agricultural production .
 During the medieval period they spread across Europe and came to play an important role in the economies of both West and East Africa . The medieval period saw them play a key role in Europe's economies . They spread across the continent and became an important part of the world economy .
 Some towns also serviced regional and longdistance trade based largely on linking ecological zones and dealing with items that were perceived as luxuries notably metals, clothing materials and spices .
 Viking merchants of Scandinavia linked the fur-producing forests of subarctic regions with the wealthy cities of the Middle East . From the 9th century a growing tfans-Saharan trade moved gold, ivory and slaves between West Africa and the Muslim north African coast .
 Trade in a variety of items, including metalwork, stones and cacao, continued to flourish in Mesoamerica . The nomadic Mongol hordes created havoc in the 13th century .
 Much of the new food surplus was now used to support people performing a range of specialist functions, many of which were not directly concerned with traditional forms of economic activity .
 Christianity joined Buddhism in generating numerous monastic communities . The number of religious specialists grew as Christianity .
 A class of literate bureaucrats devising and administering laws and gathering taxes became a feature of the majority of medieval states . Most specialists, however, were associated with the spread of states .
 Such people became central to the functioning of many European states from the 12th century . Long established in parts of Asia, such people were central to European states . They were also central to functioning of European states, such as France and Germany .
 The Chinese Song Empire was sustained by huge armies supported by taxes raised from a dependent rural populace . The samurai became a socially dominant military aristocracy in Japan in the first half of the 2nd millennium .
 The great empires of Mesoamericn and South America were built around large bodies of specialist warriors . The great empire was built around huge bodies of specialists warriors .
 In Europe an elite knightly class developed from the late 11th century . It eclipsed the more widely spread military obligations of earlier centuries . In Europe, the elite knighted class eclipsed military obligations .
 Some were extremely loose associations, such as the merchant communities of Viking Russia . Others were very loose associations such as those in Viking Russia or Viking England .
 Russian merchant oligarchs did little more than exact relatively small amounts of tribute from largely autonomous Slav subjects . While these did support a king, his rights were very limited .
 feudal states of western Europe supported an oligarchic landowning elite who exercised tight controls over their peasantry . The feudal states supported tight control of their peasants .
 The development of royal bureaucracies after about 1200 allowed them to exploit their kingdoms’ taxable resources more effectively . The kings, however, again had restricted powers. The kings had little more control of their kingdom’ resources .
 The vast Chinese empires were organized on yet another basis, with an oligarchy of bureaucratic families competing for power and influence . Families entered via civil service examinations and entered into the government system .
 Some Mesoameriean states, such as those of the Maya, also had literate bureaucracies . In the 15th century even the non-literate Incas in South America used their quipus for record-keeping .
 The history of medieval empires and states was never confined to armies, bureaucracies and dominant elites . Medieval history is not just about armies, but it's also about the dominant elites, says historian .
 Nearly all displayed progress in art, music, architecture, literature and education . Art, music and architecture, art and education were displayed .
 Elites everywhere patronized the arts and sponsored entertainments, as surviving examples from imperial China, Moorish Spain, early Renaissance Italy and many other places testify . Elites throughout the world patronage the arts, as well as the arts .
 In early 15th-cenuirY Korea the world’s first system of moveable metal type for Ixjok printing was introduced . Monasteries of Carollngjan Europe produced a cursive form of writing that accelerated manuscript production .
 During the prehistoric period humans had become widely dispersed as they had colonized the globe . During this period humans were widely dispersed .
 Many groups maintained contacts with their neighbours, exchanging ideas and materials . Nevertheless, many groups had maintained contact with each other, exchanging materials .
 The development of civilizations from the 4th mi I Leu ni um bc saw the establishment of direct political and trade links between geographically distant regions .
 Such links increased very noticeably during the medieval period, in line with advances in nautical technology . The links between the medieval and medieval period increased significantly .
 Viking adventurers forged the first tenuous links across the Atlantic to America . Viking adventurers combined the sail power and hull strength of their ships to forge the first links .
 Muslim traders exploited cyclical winds and currents to expand triangular trade that had existed since the 1st century ai> between the Red Sea, East Africa and India .
 Beyond India the trade network extended as far east as China, from where in the early 15th century expeditions sailed to Southeast Asia and Africa .
 Their ships were five times tile size of the Portuguese caravels in which the northwest coast of Africa was explored from 1415 to 1415 . The northwest coast was explored by the Portuguese in the 1415 and 1416 .
 'Land empires continued to ebb and flow' in medieval period, with some covering vast areas . While ocean travel would produce maritime empires outside the Mediterranean only after 1500 .
 Successive Chinese dynasts controlled states often larger than modem China . Successive dynasties controlled states that were larger than the modern Chinese state .
 In the 7th century, the power of the Western Turks ran from the borders of China to the fringes of eastern Europe . In the 15th century the nomadic Mongols conquered a vast area of Eurasia to create the largest land empire the world has ever seen .
 Political, economic and cultural tics between states all burgeoned in the medieval period, accelerating the process of making the world a ■'smaller' place .
 interaction across Eurasia brought the plague to Europe to particularly devastating effect in the 14th century . However, interaction generated new wealth and cultural stimulation in Europe .
 The rise of Islam from the 630s cut a swathe across the Christian Mediterranean world . T
 missionary Christianity spread ever further into northern and eastern Europe . Minority Christian regions survived in Central Asia, the Middle East and northeast Africa .
 Buddhism, marginalized in the subcontinent of its birth, extended further north and east . Buddhism extended into Tibet, China, Southeast Asia, Korea and, finally, Japan . Buddhism was marginalized in India's birth but extended further east .
 In Southeast Asia it faced in turn a challenge from Hinduism and then from Islam . In turn, it was challenged by Hinduism, then by Islam .
 Buddhism, Christianity and Islam were ultimately the most successful . But the older tenets of Judaism and Brahmanical Hinduism still found converts . Buddhism and Christianity were ultimately successful .
 Hellenism, the neo-Classical philosophy of the Mediterranean world, survived only in a subordinate role . Local ‘pagan’ traditions and preliterate belief systems often disappeared when challenged persistently by a missionary religion such as Buddhism or Christianity .
 Islam emerged in the 7th century as a mass movement of devout converts to the Koranic revelation . Men employed warfare to help win adherents from Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism and the older localized faiths . The impact of Islam Islam was seen as a major factor in winning adherents from
 It fractured the cultural unity of the Christianized Roman Mediterranean and totally eclipsed Zoroastrianism in Persia . The Christianization of the Roman Mediterranean was a major factor in the development of Christianity in the Roman Empire .
 Islamic secular culture absorbed Classical, Zoroastrian and Hindu traditions as well as those of the Arabian Desert . The Islamic state of Islam was founded in the Middle Ages in medieval times .
 Global expansion of Islamic world brought subdivision and even schism . However, the global expansion of the Islamic world also brought subdivisions and schism.
 The Islamic sunna was variously interpreted, often regionally, by four separate law schools . The sunna has been interpreted by four different law schools in the Islamic world .
 Shiite partisans of dynastic leadership split right away from the consensual Sunni tradition and developed their own conventions . Shiite partisans split away from consensual Sunni traditions and developed own conventions.
 By the time Islam reached the Danube in Europe, the Niger in West Africa and the Moluccas in Southeast Asia in the 15th century, it was far from cohesive . Islam was far less cohesive than when it reached Europe, Africa and Southeast Asia .
 Christian minorities held on in Egypt, the Middle East and Central Asia . “Christendom” became increasingly identified with Europe, where both the Western and the Eastern traditions compensated for their losses to Islam by missionary activity .
 Latin Christianity won over Germanic-speaking peoples and their central European neighbours, while large areas of the Balkans and eastern Europe were converted to Orthodoxy . Large areas of Eastern Europe and the Balkans were converted .
 The Great Schism of 1054 brought about the divide between Catholicism and Orthodoxy . After centuries of intermittent disagreement between the Latin and Greek Churches, the Great Schist of 10 54 finally brought about a divide .
 They put Muslims forever on guard against Latin Christendom and may have added to the pressure on communities of oriental Christians to convert to Islam .
 Militant Latin Christendom was more successful in the Baltic region and the Iberian Peninsula . The later medieval period saw the political reconquest of all Moorish territory .
 By 1500 Spain had become a launchpad for transatlantic ventures and the transmission of Christianity to the New World .
 Buddhism lost its western lands to Islam and it never regained any large-scale presence in India, the subcontinent of its birth, where the mainstream Hindu tradition predominated alongside what remained of the Jain faith .
 In China the secular philosophy of Confucianism was revitalized during the Tang dynasty of the 7th to 9th centuries . It was kept classical status and control of the education system .
 It offered moral and intellectual guidelines for a life of public service, virtuous prosperity and happiness to members of the scholar gentry, including the ‘mandarins’ of the Chinese civil service .
 Kami is a traditionalist compendium of reverence for nature, land and state which remained intrinsic to Japanese cultural identity . It became remarkably pervasive and was intellectually and spiritually creative .
 Despite profound divergences in creed and world outlook, the major medieval faiths had organizational and cultural parallels . Despite profound differences in creed, they had organizational parallels .
 All had “professional’s adherents who adopted a consciously devout, disciplined or even ascetic way of life . All had 'professional' adherents .
 The reclusive tradition of withdrawal to the wilderness pervaded a range of religious cultures . Hermits and wandering "holy men" were never as influential as members of disciplined religious orders and brotherhoods .
 The Sangha was central to the life of the Buddhist world and included nuns . The great Benedictine houses of western Europe preserved a cultural and political inheritance through centuries of feudal disorder as did the great Buddhist houses of medieval Japan .
 When mendicancy appeared in the West, with the establishment in the 13th century of wealthy orders of friars, it was very different from the contemplative and ascetic mendicicancy of the East .
 In many countries the educated clergy were the only people able to write and therefore worked as official scribes . The educated clergy worked as scribes for many of the world's top officials .
 Churches, mosques and temples operated a broadcasting system and communications network . Pilots and travellers could expect hospitality from religious foundations .
 Members of religious communities were adept at acquiring communal or institutional wealth . Members of many religious communities acquired wealth by acquiring communal wealth .
 Hindu temples were the banks of South India and 15th-century Portuguese overseas enterprise was funded by the crusading Order of Christ . Portuguese overseas venture funded by order of Christ. They could operate as financiers .
 Much of the ritual year was defined by medieval religion and, where communal prayer was an obligation, the hours of the day were also important .
 Spires, domes and towers of religious architecture dominated the skylines of major cities . The spires and domes were the spires of religious buildings .
 Early Islam experienced a succession of breakaway movements from the mainstream Sunni community Kharijite, Ibadhi and a range of Shiite alternatives . The Buddhist world, for example, saw the development of eccentric and magical practices on the margins of the Tan trie tradition .
 In the Christian world many ‘heresies’ countered established orthodoxy . Many “heresies,’s” countered established orthodox Christian beliefs .
 At the height of the Christian reconquest of Moorish territory in Spain, Santa Maria La Blanca in Toledo functioned peaceably as the mosque on Fridays, the synagogue on Saturdays and the church on Sundays .
 Theravada tradition was associated with independence from the influence of Chinese culture . Wherever it took root in Southeast Asia, the Mahayana tradition was widely regarded as ""Chinese"" Buddhism .
 Both lost both lands and devotees to Islam in the Near East and North Africa . But resilient Christian communities continued to survive in these areas under Muslim rule .
 Angkhorean monc/o/o dominated the mainland of Southeast Asia for four centuries . Empire of Srivijaya gradually gained control of many of the ports and polities scattered along the coasts .
 Srivijaya had the advantage of possessing a rich agricultural hinterland . Although not the closest of these polities to the sources of major trade commodities such as camphor, sandalwood, pepper, cloves and nutmeg, it was also close to the source of camphor
 Southeast Asia was a region in which warfare was endemic . The borders of political entities, known as mandalas, expanded and contracted with the power of their overlords .
 To the south of Nam Viet was Champa, where fishing, trade and piracy were more important economic activities than agriculture . Fishing, trade, piracy was more important than agriculture in Nam Viet .
 By the 6th century Champa included kingdom of Funan to the south . O' Borneo S an t h C h i n a n a Sea A By the . 6th . century .
 His new capital at Hariharalaya was on the great inland sea of Tonle Sap the key to the floodwaters of the Mekong that were essential for the intensive rice irrigation schemes on which Angkor depended .
 The hold of the Khmers over central mainland Southeast Asia was to be broken by the Thais . Thais and Burmese kingdoms were to be divided into two kingdoms .
 In the middle of the 7th century the Thais had formed the kingdom of Nanzhao in southwestern China .
 Chinese had conquered the Buddhist kingdom of Pyu in the middle of the 8th century . Perhaps partly due to pressure from the Chinese, they had moved south along the river valleys .
 It was the first of three Thai kingdoms to emerge on the Chao Phraya River, displacing earlier Hindu kingdoms like Dvaravati .
 Pegu fostered trading links with India and maritime Southeast Asia through its seaports, which included Martaban . Pegu was one of Burma's most important cities .
 Pegu was often in conflict with the inland state of Ava, which craved access to the pons controlled by Pegu . Ava was constantly harassed by the Shan hill peoples, culminating in the assassination of the king in 1426 . Despite occasional support from Ming China, the
 Throughout the Malaysian Peninsula and much of island Southeast Asia, maritime empires flourished . The empire of Srivijaya was one of the most successful maritime empires in Asia .
 The empire of Srivijaya was based on control of the resources of the forests and seas of the Indonesian archipelago . The empire was based near the modern port of Palemhang in Sumatra .
 They kept control of Chcn-la of Water until it was taken over by the Khmer Empire . They also held sway over large areas of Sumatra .
 In the 11 th century a new power emerged in east Java, and control of the international trade routes began to slip away from Srivijaya .
 In 1025 this process was hastened when the Srivijayan capital was sacked by Ghola invaders from south India . Gholas invaded the capital in 1025 and sacked it .
 Airlangga was one of the most important of the rulers of the east Javanese kingdom . Airlanggga was the ruler of the empire which came to dominate and grow wealthy on the burgeoning international trade in spices . He was the most powerful ruler of his kingdom, known as
 In the mid13th century the rulers of Singhasari took over Kediri to lay the foundations of the great maritime empire of Majapahit, which controlled the region until the 15th century .
 Ham, ll readied the northern tip of Sumatra in the 13th century; by the 1 5lh century it had reached Malaya and Java . A Fie Irade routes that had facifaated Ihe spread of Hinduism and Buddhism to Soulheaif Asia aka
 A number of Muslim states were created at the expense of the Mappahit kingdom . In 1511 Melaka fell to the Portuguese, ushering in an era during which Europeans wreaked great change an the Muslim, Buddhist and Hindu kingdoms and empires of Southeast Asia .
 This was the first step to ending a system in which the expansion and defence of the empire depended on the deployment of mercenary armies and the imposition of high levels of taxation on the peasantry . The end of the system was the end of a system that relied heavily on mercenary armies .
 Byzantine Empire was the continuation, without break, of the Roman Empire . Byzantines saw themselves as Romans, and saw their empire as the continuation of the Empire . The Byzantine Empire ruled out of Rome and ruled for centuries .
 To give a starting date for the Byzantine Empire is a matter of debate among historians . Historians are divided as to whether or not the start date is correct .
 The date of 527, when Justinian became emperor, is one of several options . Justinian launched a farreaching campaign of conquest in 527 . The date is thought to be when he became emperor and launched a campaign of conquests .
 Others include 330, when Constantine the Great moved his capital to the city of Byzantium, naming it Constantinople, and 410, when Rome was sacked .
 The Western Empire virtually ceased to exist, leaving Constantinople and the Eastern Empire as the last bastion of Christian civilization . Yet another is 476, when the Western empire virtually ceased . The Eastern Empire was the last stronghold of Christian culture .
 Justinian looked to the west to regain the old empire of Rome . He and his general Belisarius conquered North Africa and Italy, while struggling to hold the eastern frontier .
 During the 7th century most of these territorial gains were lost . However, the resources of the empire were not sufficient to retain this ground . The resources were not enough to retain these ground .
 In the four centuries between the reigns of Justinian and Basil, emperors never ceased both to fight and negotiate for territory . Justinian's reigns were the last of the Roman Empire .
 Basil “the Bulgar-Slayer” brought the entire Balkan peninsula under Byzantine control . Byzantine forces defeated the Bulgarians in the 11th century . Byzantine rule of the Balkans was seen as one of the greatest gains to the west .
 Basil forged links with the Rus and Vikings to the north, employing them as troops in his wars of conquest . Basil also forged links to the Rus, Vikings and used them to fight for his kingdom .
 The emperor was the beginning and end of the political and administrative structure . Totalitarian in ambition and ideology, absolute in his power to intervene directly in every aspect of both government and life itself .
 In the 7th century, Roman provinces were reorganized into large units called “themes” {map 2), where the military commander also functioned as civil administrator and judge .
 The population of each theme provided the basis of recruitment for the army, which took the form of a peasant militia . The population was the basis for recruitment .
 Ordinary soldiers were given land in frontier regions and exempted from taxation in exchange for military service . Ordinary soldier was given land and exempt from tax in return for service .
 Theme generals became pretenders to the imperial throne . By the 8th century the themes were the centres of revolts .
 Central government worked to diminish the power of large themes in the 8th and 9th centuries . By the 11th century the military commanders were replaced by civil governors .
 Church and state Byzantium saw itself as the Christian empire under God f its mission to reduce the world to one empire . Byzantine state of Byzantine Empire ruled the Byzantine Empire under God .
 Five patriarchates, based at Constantinople, Rome, Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch, marked out the centres of Christian worship in the Late Roman period .
 By the 11th century, the three oriental sees were no longer part of the empire . In the ensuing centuries it was the struggle between Rome and Constantinople that affected the course of Byzantine history .
 Beneath the patriarchs was a system of bishoprics, within which the bishops derived considerable influence from their control of ecclesiastical properties and charitable institutions .
 From the mid-Alh century, however, defensive warfare became endemic, and in the early 7th century ollocks by (he Avars and Arabs led to the extinction of (he empire) from the 7th Century .
 Basil II succeeded in expanding the boundaries once more in the 1 1th century . A prolonged period of determined defence followed before Basil II re-expanded the borders . Basil II was the first to expand the boundaries of the kingdom .
 There is evidence that by the middle of the 4th century there were 14 palaces, 14 churches, 8 aqueducts, 2 theatres and a circus . The city also had homes for inhabitants who were forced to move to the city from nearby settlements .
 Hagia Sophia, the great church built by Justinian as a centre of worship for all Christendom, can still be seen in present-day Istanbul . The great church was built in the Byzantine capital, Constantinople .
 A handful of imperial monuments exist, the most obvious of which ore the 5th-century city walls in the shape of an arc almost 6 kilometres long . The arc is almost 6 km long and is the largest of the city walls of all its kind .
 The importance of religion in the empire is reflected in its surviving artistic achievements . Artworks include works by the Roman Empire .
 Churches and monasteries, often decorated with mosaics and wall paintings, are to be found throughout the empire’s territories . Portable works of art, such as enamels, books, metalwork and, above all, icons, are also found .
 The few secular buildings and objects that remain are often in Late Roman cities such as Ephesus gradually abandoned in the 7th century but most notably in Constantinople .
 Constantinople was the most important city in the empire . Simply called “the City” , Constantinople was simply called ‘the city’
 The emperor's base was the centre of all civil, military and ecclesiastical administration . It was the emperor’s base, and thus the . centre of the . administration .
 The main trade routes were sea or riverbased and the chief centres of trade were on the coast . T
 Constantinople served as the heart of Christendom for many centuries . It was the emperor's capital and was also known for its role in the Roman Empire .
 Shortly before his death (probably in 632) he led his triumphant army back to reclaim Mecca . Thereafter he sent missionaries to spread his message .
 Muslim armies inspired by zeal for their new faith and a desire for plunder had inflicted defeat on both regional superpowers, I he Byzantines ami the Sasaniam, already weakened by decades of conflict with each other .
 Muslim state reached the limits of its westward expansion into Europe at the Battle of Poitiers in 732 . After overrunning the whole of the North African coastal region, the Muslim state took root in much of the Iberian Peninsula .
 The euphoria generated by these successes was tempered from the start by disagreements between Muslims concerning several matters . The question of who was to lead the community was most crucially important .
 Muhammad had combined both religious and political authority in his own person . This model was followed for the first three centuries by the caliphs who led the community after him . Muhammad had made no arrangement for the succession, and more than once in the century after his I n the second quarter
 From the 630s the tribes of the Arabian Peninsula burst out of their homelands and attacked the fertile regions to the north . The campaigns resulted in the complete destruction of the Sasanian Empire and the end of Byzantine control of the Near East .
 They then set about forging a new social and cultural order in the conquered territories, based on the principles of the religion they brought with them . The religion has continued to exert a profound influence over the region to the present day .
 Muhammad was a trader from Mecca, the main commercial town of western Arabia . The community was largely the creation of a single man, Muhammad . Muhammad was Muhammad, a Muslim man from Mecca . Muhammad died of his injuries in the early 1900s .
 Muhammad preached a new moral system that demanded the replacement of idol worship with submission to a common code of law . He identified himself as the “Seal of the Prophets” (after whom no others would come)
 The Islamic world was thrown into turmoil by fiercely contested civil wars fought over this issue . The death of the Islamic world is the subject of a new series of Islamic civil wars .
 This caliphal dynasty succeeded in giving an Arab Muslim identity to the state . Although much maligned by later Muslim writers, this caliphial dynasty succeeded .
 The caliph Abd al-malik Marwan decreed that Arabic should be the language of administration, began a programme of religious building and instituted a uniform Islamic coinage .
 Trade flourished in the region, with Syria in particular benefiting from the revenues flowing into the caliph’s coffers . Syria was one of the most prosperous countries in the world .
 Abbasid courtly culture borrowed heavily from that of the Persian royalty . The focus of Muslim culture now swung eastwards from Syria . It is no coincidence that Abbasid culture borrows heavily from Persian royalty, for example .
 At the same time as Islam was expanding internally, Muslim eyes and minds began to be opened to a wider world, both through trade in particular with the Far East and through interest in ancient knowledge, primarily Greek .
 The Abbasids failed to gain universal acceptance for their claim to be the legitimate leaders of the Muslim world . Like their predecessors, the Abbasids were not accepted as legitimate leaders in Islam .
 The caliphs continued to rule in Baghdad until they were deposed by the Mongols in the mid-13th century . They gradually lost their wakr an territories to local warlords who governed independently .
 In the 11th century steppe Turks invaded the Muslim world and changed the ethnic and cultural map as decisively as the Arabs had done four centuries earlier . In the 12th century these kingdoms were swept away by the steppe Turk .
 This painting of Medina, with the mosque of Muhammad at its centre, comes from an illustrated Persian text .
 Rapid urbanization followed the rise of the Abbasids, particularly in Iraq and Persia, as would-be converts flocked to the cities from the countryside .
 Only 10 per cent of the population of these regions was Muslim when the Abbasids came to power . Within a century this figure hod grown to 50 per cent and reached 90 per cent by the beginning of the 10th century .
 Samanid kings encouraged the composition of Persian poetry at their court . Buyid rulers of Iraq and Persia held the caliph captive in his palace and styled themselves Shahanshahs like the Persian kings .
 Polish and Bohemian rulers used fortified administrative centres to dominate previously independent tribes . The fortified centres were used by the Polish and Czechs rulers to dominate .
 In the early 5th century, the nomadic I luits conquered and drove out Germanic peoples to the west of this area . Slavs were able to move as far as the Daniils frontier of the Byzantine Empire by around 500 years .
 Slavs also moved north and west as Avars encroached on their territory . At the same time Slavs were also moving west and east . Slavs moved north, west and west during the time of Avars' invasion .
 Most of central Europe as far west as the Elbe was settled by Slavs Moravia and Bohemia by 550 . Much of the region had been settled by 600, and much of Elbe region by 600 .
 Ideologically in the emergence and distribution of various Slavic cultures, which are mainly distinguished by pottery they produced . The process can be traced a re Ideologically .
 In the 6th century the Slavs operated in numerous small and independent social units of a few thousand . The Slavs operate in numerous social units, some of the largest social units in Europe .
 Some had kings, but there were no established social hierarchies and no hereditary nobility merely freemen and slaves . Some kings were kings, some were freemen or slaves .
 Slavs were particularly ready to adopt captured outsiders as full members of their groups . This partly explains why they were able to Slavieizc central and eastern Europe in a relatively short period of time . Slavs also adopted captured outsiders into their groups, such as Slavs .
 They lived in small unfortified villages, grew crops and raised animals . They lived on small unfortsified villages where they lived .
 Hillforts each serving as a local centre of refuge for a small social unit became the characteristic form of Slavic settlement . Several thousand hillforts have been found in central and eastern Europe .
 Much of Slavs' new wealth derived from contacts with economically more developed neighbours . Much of the Slav's new wealth came from contact with more developed countries .
 Western Slavic groups and the Rus captured slaves from eastern Slavs living in the area between their respective territories . Western Slavs captured slaves . The Rusians captured slave slaves from Eastern Slavs .
 intermediaries bought slaves at the trading centres of the south Baltic coast (such as Elbing, Wiskiauten and Grobin) and transported them down the river routes of eastern Europe, particularly the Volga, which gave direel access to the Caspian Sea and Muslim Mes
 Slave trade played an important role in generating new* political structures . Tiie formation of states was an important part of the history of the slave trade . The slave trade played a key role in the formation of new states .
 Traders had to organize to procure slaves, and this, together with the new silver wealth, made possible new ambitions . Traders were able to buy slaves and slaves for their slaves .
 In the first half of the 10th century, Miesco 1 established the first Polish state with the help of his own armoured cavalry, which he maintained .
 Perhaps this force was first employed to capture slaves, but it soon took on the role of establishing and maintaining territorial control with the aid of a series of hillforts .
 Over the following century the dynasty extended its influence much further afield . In its newly acquired territories it replaced existing hillforts with fortified administrative centres to maintain its control .
 Scandinavian traders and Slavs who produced the goods, shared the profits and quickly absorbed the Scandinavians . Each of these trading groups consisted of a relatively small number of originally Scandinavian traders .
 While Slavic state formation generally involved asserting aggressive dominion, this was not always the ease . US' VOlHYNtA ' C '""""""‘V • .«e* ^ % y&l
 During the 10 th century the El he Slavs comprising the previously independent Ahod rites, H eve Ilians and Sorbs acted together to throw off the domination being exerted on them by Ottoman Saxony . In the middle of the century, Saxony had carved up their territories into a
 The Elbe Slavs reasserted their independence in a great uprising of 983 . The adoption of Christianity State formation also had a religious dimension .
 Bus, Polish and Bohemian leaders all adopted Christianity, Kiev, Gniezno and Prague, capitals of their respective states, all became archbishoprics . In the 10th century, Bus, Czech and Polish leaders adopted Christianity .
 Christianization allowed ambitious Slavic dynasts to sweep away not only die old Slavic gods but also the cults that were unique to each independent group . The cults reflected the old political order and reflected the new political order .
 The establishment of strong Christian churches contributed significantly to the process whereby the small, independent Slavic communities of the 6th century evolved into new Slavic states of central Europe .
 Poland and Russia each centred on their respective copitok of Prague, Growo and Kiev . While dosely controlling their rare areas, these new stales also fought each alter for control of the fond* in between (Moravia, Volhynia, Silesia,
 At the same time German expansion ai firsi demographic, iten political was to undermine ite independence of ihe western Slavic states . At the time, Germany was trying to strengthen its influence in the region .
 Chinese pilgrims travelled along the trade routes of the Silk Road to visit stupas and shrines in India . Throughout the empire Buddhism flourished throughout the empire .
 Abbasid Empire gained control of the area west of the Pamirs and established the boundary between the civilizations of Islam and China . This last battle resulted in the Abbasid . Empire gaining control .
 A network of canals linked the Yangtze Valley with areas to the north, supplying the huge army that defended the long imperial borders . Canals supplied the long-defending borders of China .
 The influence of Tang China was to be felt throughout Asia in the three centuries that followed . Tang China is considered the most influential in Asia's history .
 Its political stability and economic expansion led to the unprecedented development of links with many peoples throughout East and Central Asia . These fostered a cultural renaissance and cosmopolitanism in China itself . China's political stability led to an unprecedented development in the region .
 Tang armies brought the trade routes of the Silk Road under Chinese control . Protectorates established as far west as Ferghana and Samarqand .
 In the middle of the 7th century, the Chinese Empire reached its maximum extent prior to the Manchu conquests a thousand years later . The Chinese Empire was reached its peak in the middle and middle centuries .
 Tang models of government were taken up by many neighbouring peoples who expanded their own spheres of influence . For a hundred years Tang armies were not seriously challenged .
 Nanzhao in the southwest, Bohai in the northeast, Silla in Korea and Sijo in the early Japanese state centred on Heijo .
 Tang system of centralized government was introduced by the second Tang emperor, Tai Zong . The Tang system was supported by a professional bureaucracy of civil servants . The system of central government was first introduced in Tang Dynasty .
 The cities were linked to the countryside through a well-developed infrastructure of canals and roads . The cities are linked to each other through canals, roads and canals .
 In the Tang period peasants owned their own land, paying for it in taxes and labour . New agricultural land was opened up, especially in the south of China . In the first part of the Tang era peasants were able to own their land .
 Later on, as central power waned, wealthy and powerful landowners extended their area of control . Wealthy and powerful people extended their areas of control in times of power .
 Rural prosperity supported the growth of new industries, notably the production of fine pottery and luxury goods that were often inspired by fashionable foreign items .
 Among the grave offerings were exquisite gold crowns and other jewellery made of gold foil and wire . The grave offerings included exquisite gold crowns and other gold jewellery .
 Rne stoneware pottery made in the kingdom of Kaya was exported to Japan .
 Tang armies assisted the kingdom of Silla, which in its campaign of expansion had crushed Paekche in 660 . In 660, Tang armies helped Silla in its expansion .
 Korean scholars, courtiers and Buddhist monks made frequent journeys to China, and Korean trading communities were established in eastern China .
 Not only the Chinese and Koreans, but also the Japanese, were brought together by the spread of Buddhism from India throughout East Asia . The role of Buddhism in East Asia was key to bringing together the region's cultures .
 Buddhism often received official support and many of the most spectacular Buddhist monuments in Asia were built at this time, from the cave temples at Dunhuang in China to the Horyuji and Todaiji temples in Nara in Japan .
 On the Japanese archipelago a centralized bureaucratic government developed from a series of successive capitals in the Kinai region . A centralized bureaucracy developed from successive capitals .
 In the later part of the Heian period the samurai culture, which placed great value on military prowess, also evolved . The samurai culture also evolved, placing great value in military prowess .
 The faltering of the Tang dynasty was symbolized by the rebellion of An Lushan, the commander of the northeastern armies, who gained great influence over Emperor Xuan Zong through the imperial concubine Yang Yuhuan .
 Although the rebellion was eventually put down, the empire was greatly weakened . The empire became vulnerable to external attacks . The rebellion was put down but the empire became weakened .
 As central control weakened and provinces became more powerful, China once again moved towards disintegration . Central control weakened as provinces became stronger .
 China’s relations with surrounding countries changed as these countries themselves changed . China's relations with neighboring countries have changed as they themselves changed. China's relationship with other countries has changed dramatically .
 In 889 serious rebellions broke out in Silla in 889, and out of these rebellions was born the kingdom of Koryo, centred in the north, which was to control all of Korea from 936 .
 Buddhism rapidly gained popularity in Japan following its introduction from Korea in the 6th century, but traditional Japanese Shinto religion was actively encouraged by 7thand 8th-century rulers .
 The two creeds were brought together in the Tendai teachings of Saicho after the capital moved from Heijo to Heian in 794 . The strong links between religion and government were subsequently severed .
 The long-established East Asian tradition of erecting lifesize stone terracotta guardian figures reached its apogee in the three-coloured glazed statues of the Tang period .
 As a younger man, Charlemagne averaged 29 kilometres a day . He stayed regularly in all parts of his kingdom, thus enabling him to keep his local representatives in line . As a young man, he averaged 29km a day and stayed regularly .
 Also performing this function were teams of inspectors {missi), each usually comprising a layman and a prominent ecclesiastic . The inspectors were also known as 'missi'
 Charlemagne's grandson, Charles the Bald, later evolved clearly designated areas of inspection in the north . Charles later evolved a clearly designated area of inspection for inspection . The area was later developed into an inspection zone .
 T he Franks were created by reorganization of a number of Germanic groups on the northern Rhine frontier of the Roman Empire in the 3rd century ad. Roman Empire .
 The Salians and Ripuarians were divided into warbands, each with their own king . They comprised several subgroups, most prominently the Salians . The Ripuarian and Salian warbands were also known as warbands .
 The two men belonged to a prominent Salian family called the Merovingians after a legendary founder Merovech . Their careers turned the family into a royal dynasty for all Frankish peoples .
 Childeric started by taking over the Roman province of Belgica II . Clovis added the region around Paris , Alemannia and Aquitaine to the region .
 The Franks did not evolve governmental structures sufficient strength to hold this large new state together . They did not, however, evolve enough government structures to hold them together .
 The conquests had generated renewable wealth for kings to reward local landowners and hence attract their support . But when conquests petered out kings had to buy support using their own landed resources .
 In the 8th century the rulers of Austrasia in the northeast called the Carolingian dynasty reunited the whole Frankish world . The Carolingians ruled the whole of the Frankish kingdom from 8th-century onwards .
 Merovingian leaders Childeric and Clovis eliminated rival Frankish warlords to create a new dominant force in post-Roman western Europe . The Romans had kept the tribes divided and weak, but the Merovingians took over the Frankish tribes .
 Part 2 were on campaign for all but five years, taking advantage of an open frontier to the east . Part 2 of Part 1 were on the campaign for the first time in five years .
 Austrasia’s rulers could offer ongoing rewards to would-be supporters and thus outbid noble rivals from the other regions . As a result of the rewards, Austrasians could outbid nobles from other regions, the rulers could also outbid them .
 Charlemagne’s grandsons in the Treaty of Verdun in 843 . It was thus much easier to create continuous territories when the kingdom was divided . The Treaty was made in 844 .
 Powerful landowners were essential to a king’s rule, but they had to be prevented from becoming too independent . Continued royal travel was a central part of the strategy, with continual royal travel .
 Merovingian patterns reasserted themselves after expansion petered out after the conquest of Saxony . Louis the Pious was succeeded by a great number of sons .
 Financial resources, above all land, were transferred by rival members of the dynasty in a bid to buy supporters . Financial resources were transferred to rival members in bid to support supporters .
 The Carolingian Renaissance under Charlemagne was made to revive Classical learning . The Renaissance was made in the Carolingingian era .
 This Carolingian Renaissance was generated by the work of a relatively small number of institutions . Its central thrust was religious, and its central thrust is religious .
 Carolingian monks copied Classical texts because their language and contents were considered necessary for a full understanding of the Bible . Monks copied classical texts because they were necessary for the Bible's understanding .
 His bishops attempted to enforce this programme through a sequence of reforming councils . The councils were designed to harmonize standards throughout the empire . They were meant to be harmonized across the world .
 The Papacy likewise received strong royal support, and was endowed with the lands which would form the basis of the papal state through to the 19th century . The papacy also received support from the royal family .
 There were also associated declines in population and agricultural production . The decline in agricultural production was also associated with declining population levels .
 Monetary-based exchange also increased using, from the later 7th century, a lower value silver currency . The currency was used to exchange money for goods and goods .
 The quantity and quality of silver coins grew dramatically with the new coinage introduced by Charlemagne in the 790s a coinage that Charles the Bald later managed to his own profit . A dense network of mints allowed him periodically to change coin types, demand that people use new
 The Carolingian period ended in failure. Politically and politically, the period was a failure . Carolingan achievements include the creation of the Carolingi dynasty .
 Carolingian period was deeply formative in terms of economic and cultural terms . Carolingan period was a period of formative period for the Roman Empire .
 Carolingian scholars also set new standards in Christian belief, practice and intellectual development . Latin Christendom grew from the seeds planted by Charlemagne .
 They revived Classical Latin from Classical texts, making it the language of medieval learning . They also revived Latin Latin from classical texts .
 Sea trading links flourished to the north and new centres of trade established . Sea trade links to north and sea trading links were established .
 Louis the Pious ordered that there should be a market in every county, and they feature widely in the charters of Charles the Bald . Charles was Charlemagne's only surviving son, Charles the Bald, who was born in France and died in France .
 Carolingian period saw substantial moves away from locally focused subsistence agricultural economies towards greater specialization and exchange . Carolingians moved away from local subsistence farming to greater specialization, exchange exchange .
 The military surress of the empire is evident from the large number of rich burials that have been found, particularly in the middle Danube region, which date back to the Huraik period .
 Huns, Avars and Avars were the most important of these west-ward-moving peoples . They were followed by further groups from the confederation of the so-called Western Turks (the Bulgars, Kliazars and the Fmno-Ugrian-speaking
 As more nomads moved onto the steppe, they drove the earlier arrivals further west and towards the lands around the Mediterranean lands . Their relative wealth could he tapped through raids and more sustained military campaigns, or through the extraction of annual tributes .
 Avars later mourned a series of campaigns against the Byzantines, particularly in the 580s . The Avars extracted a steadily increasing tribute from the Byzantine Empire .
 Magyars terrorized Europe with raids from the Baltic Sea to the Mediterranean coast of France . In the 10th century, the Magyar raided the Baltic and the Mediterranean coasts of Europe .
 The steppe peoples not only raided the empires of other peoples but also built empires of their own . They built empires either on the steppe or within Europe .
 All these shifting empires were based on the conquest and exploitation of subject tribes . Subject tribes were usually a mixture of nomadic peoples and more settled agricultural groups .
 Attila’s Hunnic Empire of the 440s consisted of a dominant Hunnic core but with numerous, particularly Germanic, groups such as Goths, Gepids, Herules, Rugians, Sueves and Lombards .
 The Avar Empire of the later 6th century incorporated Gepids, Bulgars and numerous Slavic groups . The Bulgar state in the Dobrudja and surrounding territories also incorporated many Slavic tribes .
 Khazars on the Volga steppe exercised dominion over the nomadic Magyars before they established their own empire in the Ukraine, as well as over large Slavic and later Scandinavian Rus groups to the north .
 Once they had achieved some degree of dominance, peoples of the steppe tended to cease being simple nomads . Social evolution sometimes followed .
 Huns were led in their continual search for new pastures by a multiplicity of chiefs . Huns first reached the Ukrainian steppe around 375, when they were led by a number of chiefs.
 By the 430s, however, one dominant dynasty, that of Attila, had emerged, suppressing all rivals . Attila's reign was dominated by his son-in-law .
 Huns were able to use the wealth of the Roman Empire to create a new, more stratified social hierarchy under a single ruler . With warfare dominating their lives, the Huns used warfare to create the new social hierarchy .
 The nature of these nomad empires explains much of their impact on Europe . The nomads were nomads who lived in Europe for centuries . Their nomadic history explains the impact of the nomads .
 Built on military dominance, they required continued military success to survive . The U.S. needs continued success in order to survive in the world's first era .
 In their campaigns they used soldiers and leaders recruited from the peoples they dominated, and their successes were some extent shared with these peoples .
 A successful campaign both maintained a leader’s prestige and provided booty to be distributed among nomad core and selected leaders among subject groups, whose loyalty was thus maintained . The booty was distributed not only among nomads but also to selected leaders .
 The campaigns led to a substantial degree of instability in Europe, as groups escaping from the intruders sought new homes .
 The collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century was brought about by Germanic groups escaping the Huns . Avar pressure later led to a great migration of Slavs into central and eastern Europe and Lombards into Italy .
 The Europeans eventually learned how to contain the steppe peoples, for whom logistic problems of continuous warfare increased as closer targets were conquered .
 Attila’s death in 453, the Huns had ceased to exist as an independent force in Europe . Attila died 16 years after his death, Attila was the last Huns to remain independent in Europe.
 Without booty to distribute or prestige to inspire fear, Attila’s sons lost control of the subject peoples . Attila's sons were unable to control their subjects .
 Slavs and Bulgars escaped from the Avar Empire in the 7th century . Similarly, when defeat by Constantinople had curbed the power of the Avars, numerous Slavs escaped from their homeland .
 Khazars played a dominant role in trade with both Bulgars and Magyars in the 9th century . Khazar was dominant in trade throughout the Ukrainian steppe with the Bulgar and the Magyar .
 Their hegemony also extended to the Slavic and Rus groups of the neighbouring forested zone to the north .
 Viking trodcfs exchanged goods in western Europe and following the river routes of western Russia . Viking tuts and staves were traded far from Baghdad .
 Both Coders and raiders used the new ship technology to create new ways ol malting money out of the woallh of the great Carolinpn and Abfaasid empires .
 Herjolfsson's discoveries along the coasts of Newfoundland and Labrador were fallowed up by Led firiltswri, who in about 1003 sailed ham Greenland in order to follow her route in reverse . The discovery was made in Greenland in 1003 .
 Ibis Viking silver dragon hooded amulet comes bom Icekid . Icekid wos cotanhed by the Vikings in the 9th century .
 The term ‘Viking’ was applied only to those who undertook expeditions of plunder . It has since come to be used more widely to refer to all the inhabitants of Norway, Denmark and Sweden .
 In the late 8th century Norwegians sailed to the Shetland and Orkneys, drawn across the North Sea by prevailing winds and currents .
 Norwegians first reached the Faroes in the early 9th century and Iceland in the 860s and 870s . The Faroes and Iceland are another 1,600 kilometres northwest of Norway . The Norweigians then ranged further afield and reached further further a
 Greenland was first visited in about 900, when the Norwegian Gunnbjdrn was blown off course .
 Settlement there began in the late 10th century, bringing further explorers, such as Eirik the Red, who surveyed much of the new land . Settlement began in 10th Century, with the arrival of the Vikings .
 Most Vikings sailed in search of profit, whether as traders or raiders . Most of the Vikings were found in the form of trading and raiding . The Vikings were known for raiding and trading .
 Norwegians raided northern Britain from 796, and Danes followed suit, moving along the Channel to attack southern England and northern France . Danes also attacked southern England, northern France and northern England .
 A totally new level of activity unfolded in western Europe from the 860s with the arrival of the ‘Great Armies’ The arrival of independent groups led by their own kings enabled Vikings to settle in areas south of Scotland .
 The next seven years saw a series of assaults on the one surviving kingdom, Wessex . Wessex under Alfred the Great successfully resisted and defeated the Viking Guthrum at Edington in 878 .
 Some Vikings turned to continental Europe, and for 13 years battles raged along the rivers of northern France, even reaching Paris . Dissatisfied with this arrangement, some Vikings turned their anger into continental Europe .
 The Vikings returned to England in 892 after a serious defeat on the River Dyle . Alfred fended them off with ease . Alfred created new political neighbouring islands .
 The main forum of Viking state formation was Scandinavia itself . However, the main forum was the country itself, Scandinavia .
 Similar processes began in Norway in the 99t)s, when Olaf Tryggvasson, returning from extensive raiding in England as a rich man and a convert to Christianity, founded the Norwegian monarchy .
 The entity he created was far from stable, howev er, and Sweden also remained politically fragmented . Sweden is still politically fragmented, and the country has never been stable . Sweden has a history of political instability .
 Svein and Cunt gathered forces for the conquest of England . They were joined not only by Danes but also by numerous independent groups from across Scandinavia .
 Gnut became a strong ruler of England, but his hold on Denmark and Norway was weak, and on his death in 1035 his empire disintegrated . Within 50 years the Vikings had been driven out of England by the Normans, and by the 12th century t hey were no
 Mainly Danish, they were large enough to conquer and settle whole Anglo-Saxon kingdoms . When checked by Alfred the Greal ol Wessex in . &78 to couse similar disruption on the Continent by exploiting the major river systems of Frnnte and the Low Countries .
 The 9th century 16-sealer Gokstod s% recovered by a Norwegian excavation, is 23. metres (just over 76 feel) long, clinker plonked plonking . oak attached by a combination ol lashings and small iron plates to 19 frames to
 An Alkmlir crossing ol 1893 in a replica of this ship made in just 28 days kom Bergen to Newfoundland demonstrated ihe timeless efficiency ol ihe design .
 The diversity of interregional trade in the Middle East has led to greater diversity of trade . This diversity has helped develop the world's largest economies . The diversity has also led to the development of international trade in Africa .
 Among the lgbo in the Niger delta, for example, there was no king and loyalty to the state was maintained through religious ties, ceremonies and clans . Loyalty to the government was maintained by religious ties and ceremonies .
 Trade was intimately linked with the growth of states in West Africa . Trade was initially local and interregional in focus but later developing into Itmg-distance trade across the Sahara .
 Prosperity generated through trade, coupled with the grow th of settlements at important trade centres, gradually led to urbanization and the foundation of states .
 Jenne-jeno never grew into a state but served as a centre of trade in Saharan trade . Gold, iron and foodstuffs were traded for Saharan salt .
 Another town founded in Mali by the 7th century was Gao, later to become the capital of the Songhay Empire . Gao was later to be the capital for the Songhai Empire .
 To the west, Mauritania, the capital of the empire of Ghana also appears to have been in existence by this time . Only pan of the settlement the merchants* town of Koumbi Saleh has so far been found .
 Ghana w as in all probability the first of the states founded in West Africa . Events were also proceeding rapidly to the east of this area on the margins of Lake Chad .
 Later, apparently in the 14th century, this state shifted west of Lake Chad to Bonio and became known as Kanem-Borno . Later, the state became Kanem Borno, which is now known as Bonio .
 The forest regions, with their higher density of population than the savanna or Sahel regions, were a source of slaves, and states began to emerge in this area around the 12th century . The forest region was a source for slaves, with its higher population density .
 Trade centres such as Begho were founded perhaps as early as the 12th century . Trade appears to have been linked with the growth of the Akan states in modern Ghana .
 To the northeast the seven Hausa city-states were established during the 13th century . The seven city-state Hausan Bakwai were established to the northeast . To the north the seven city states were established .
 Kanem-Borno formed a link in the 15th century between Kanem to the east and the Songhay Empire and the Akan Empire . Together with a further seven related but non-Hausa states to the south, these formed a further link between the Kanem
 The forest kingdoms also emerged comparatively early, with Benin (now famous on account of its bronze sculptures), occupied by the 13th century . The forest kingdom also emerged  in the 12th century, with the kingdom of Benin occupying it .
 Similar castings, predating those of Benin, were produced in Ife, birthplace of the Yoruba nation . Ife is a state with a well-developed tradition of forest farming, town living and crafts .
 Indirect trans-Saharan trade is known to have occurred during the 1st millennium BC, but it is unlikely that caravans travelled across the desert until the introduction of camels .
 Archaeological evidence indicates that trans-Saharan trade became more important with the consolidation of Islam in North Africa from the early 9th century . From this time it had a major economic and social impact on the developing states of sub-Saharan Africa .
 There was a great demand in the Muslim world for West African products, particularly gold, slaves and ivory . The Muslim world was particularly keen on West African goods, such as gold and slaves .
 Transport was by camel caravans, which travelled from well to the Sahelian trade centres of Koumbi Saleh .
 Many thousands of 9th-century coloured glass beads were found at the site of Igbo-Ukwu in the southern forest zone . From there some of the goods were traded on further into West Africa indicated, for example, by the discovery of many thousands .
 Sahelian trade centres were exposed to Islam from the very beginnings of trans-Saharan trade with Muslim North Africa .
 Various local rulers of the empires of Ghana, Kanem-Borno, Mali and Songhay converted to Islam . Local merchant groups such as the Mande or Wangara were responsible for much of the trade in gold and kola nuts from Akan states .
 Hausa was also gradually Islamized but further south, in the forest states such as Ife or Benin, the traditional beliefs of animism were maintained . The traditional beliefs were maintained with religious and secular authority .
 Major events in the second half of the 15th century were to have far-reaching effects on the states, societies and trade systems of West Africa . The arrival of the Portuguese in 15th Century was a major event in the history of the continent .
 Portuguese trading post at Elmina on the coast of modern Ghana was established in 1482 . It was the first trading post on the west coast of the country .
 This meant that imported manufactured goods such as cloth could now be obtained directly from the coast . The coast was established to provide an outlet for West African commodities . This was the first time the coast had been opened to allow West African imports .
 The first cargo of slaves from West Africa to the West Indies in 1518 a momentous event with tragic consequences . The slave trade across the Atlantic also began, starting with the first cargo .
 Jenne-jeno is located on the inland Niger delta . The town is famous for its agricultural wealth, exporting rice, cereals, dried fish and fish oil .
 Town was the first of many such towns that emerged in West Africa trading raw materials and produce for everyday commodities and luxuries from other regions as far away as Muslim North Africa .
 Like the people of Benin, the Yoruba produced fine bronze heads and figurines . The Yoruba people also made fine bronze figures and heads .
 They are particularly renowned for their terracotta heads, such as this one of a 12th-13th century queen from Ife . However, they are also renowned for terraceotta heads .
 Both cotta-herding and command of raw material* including gold, copper and ivory were by now of major importance .
 Muslim traders who settled on the toast from the 9th century were responsible not only for the introduction of Islam but abo the development of Islamic slates . In the north, Christianity had become established in the Axumito kingdom .
 6th century East Africa was a mosaic of very different cultural groups employing a variety of cultural strategies . Further inland elites emerged, marked by rich burials such us those at Sanga and by substantial centres such as Great Zimbabwe .
 Foraging was still the primary means of providing food, agriculture and stockkeeping had already spread throughout the length of the comment . Foraging is still a primary source of food and agriculture .
 By the 8th century more settled communities had also begun to he established, which frequently controlled resources such as copper and ivory or acted as trading settlements .
 Some settled communities later developed into kingdoms and became integrated into extensive trading networks . Some of these settled communities became kingdoms and later became integrated in extensive trade networks .
 In Ethiopia the Christian Axumite kingdom had hegun to decline in the 7th century after losing control of its ports to the Arabs, and was finally destroyed in the l Oth century . In Ethiopia, the Axumites lost control of the ports and were finally destroyed .
 Axumite kingdom had been urban in character, the empire which replaced it was largely feudal . Its rulers shifted their court when local resources had been exhausted, shifting their court .
 Rock-cut churches, created between the 10th and the 15th centuries, are the main legacy of the t Christian Ethiopian Empire . The Ethiopian Empire was one of the most successful empires in the world .
 Islamic settlements were established along the coast and along the trade routes leading into the interior from the major ports, of which Zella was perhaps the most important . The Imamizvi ion of East Africa was born in Zella .
 As the Muslim population increased, the creation of a number of Islamic sultanates led to conflict with the Christian Ethiopian Empire . The Ethiopian Empire was ruled by Christian Christians .
 During this period the Honuili slowly expanded from around the Gulf of Aden along the coast north to Zella and south to Mogadishu, and into the interior to occupy much of the Horn of Africa . During the period they slowly expanded to include the interior of the region .
 By the 12th century 1 si a mi mi nation of this area had become well advanced . The area was well advanced in the early 1200s and 1200s .
 During the ( >th century a series of trading settlements, united bv a common religion, language and style of living, emerged along the East African coast . The settlements were united by a common language, religion, style of life .
 Swahilispeaking Islamic communities lay on a branch of the great trade routes connecting the Red Sea, southern Arabia and India . They adopted various aspects of the cultures they came in contact with .
 By the 14th century Swahili towns and settlements had greatly expanded from the early sites of Manda and Shanga and stretched from Mogadishu south to Ghibuene . Towns such as Kilwa contained fine, multi-storied houses built of coral, their inhabitants ate
 Political developments also occurred in interior East Africa . State formation in the interior was a major event in the region .
 It is thought that these enclosures were used for corralling cattle . The kingdom later came to be known as Bunyoro, based its wealth on its control of cattle .
 Control of copper and goldfields may have been a factor in the rise of other powerful elites . Control of the copper, goldfields was also a key factor in other elites' rise .
 On the Zimbabwe Plateau, with its highland and lowland grazing areas and its gold, iron, copper and tin resources, a powerful elite emerged at the beginning of the present millennium .
 Great Zimbabwe may have had a population of some 18,000 people . Its capital was located at Great Zimbabwe, a substantial complex of stone towers and enclosures .
 Stone structures indicate the extent of the authority exercised by the Zimbabwe elite . Similar stone structures are found across the plateau, indicating the extent .
 The control and exploitation of particular resources or of trade routes played a role in the development of virtually every state and kingdom in East Africa .
 The area was rich in resources in metals such as gold, copper and iron . The area is arid in exotic materials such as ivory .
 Main export from Horn of Africa was slaves, shipped up the Red Sea and to the Arabian Peninsula . The main export from the Horn was slaves .
 In return various manufactured goods were imported, including arms from the Arab world and ceramics from Arabia, Persia and China .
 Swahili houses were built with rows of wall niches to display their collections of porcelain . Ceramics were also a major import along the length of the East African coast .
 Great Zimbabwe grew wealthy from the trading of copper, gold and iron ore . The coastal trading towns controlled the export of various produces metals, ivory and slaves .
 Trading communities of the East African coast reached their height at the end of the 15th century . The trading communities of East Africa were at the height of the trading communities .
 In 1497 a Portuguese expedition led by Vasco da Gama landed at So fa I a . The Portuguese established forts at KMwa and Sofala to safeguard their trade routes to India . The rich coastal trade here soon became an equal attraction .
 The nature of these coastal settlements, and their relationship with the interior, would now alter irrevocably . It would be the first time they had been forced to leave the interior .
 Trade mules across I be Indian Ocean, which had existed al least from the 1st century AD, flourished during ihe period from SCO to 1500 . I Ion A Trade mule was a trade mule across the Indian Ocean . It had existed in the SCO from the
 Taking advantage of Ihe monsoon winds in both directions, dhows soiled between the parts af East Africa, the Red Sea, Indio, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia and China . Diversow soiled from the parts of East Africa and Red Sea .
 Great Zimbabwe was the capital of ihe rulers af a satiety that drew its wealth from bath cattle-keeping and trading with the coastal slates af East Africa . Great Zimbabwe drew wealth from baths, cattle-breeding and trading .
 In the mid15th century the settlement like Kilwo on ihe coost began to dedine . In the 15th century, Kilwo began to be dedine. Kilwo was the first settlement in the area .
 Most began in a heartland under tight dynastic control . Then spread to more distant areas which were governed only indirectly, often through local rulers . Some began in the heartland but spread to distant areas .
 In three phases of expansion the Chimu lords extended control over and beyond the valleys once controlled by the Moche, with the same tendency of avoiding highland zones . The Chimu Lords extended control of the valleys and avoided highland areas .
 Evidence of Chimu control in the south is patchy as local polities were incorporated by the Chimu without any substantial change to local government . By contrast, areas to the north may have been subjected to territorial conquest .
 Around 135(1) the Chimu conquered the Lambayeque Valley, where the Bican culture with its rich burials and prosperous. irrigated settlements bad succeeded the Moche . The Chimu are believed to be the descendants of the Bicans .
 Chau Chan wielded heavy control until 1475, when the Chimu emperor was seized by the Incas . Chau Chan was taken hack to their highland capital of Cuzco, Peru, and taken to the highland .
 Sketchy historical evidence helps identify the the lords of Chimu and of its capital Chan Chon . By 1475, led by Emperor Minchancaman, Hod vaulted aver the Sechura Desert into a region formerly linked to the Amazonian cultural am. am.
 Great canals connecting river valleys facilitated irrigation agriculture and the growth of urban civilization in the heartland of the Chimu .
 The so-called ""Maya tlollapse"" was more pronounced in the centre of the peninsula than elsewhere . It was partly due to a lower birth rate and a higher mortality rate here than elsewhere, but also because of large-scale movements of people into more peaceful zones .
 Some Maya groups undoubtedly moved to cities in the northwest which had only just overcome a severe water shortage by developing a new means of collecting and storing rainwater in underground cisterns .
 In the late 13th century the smaller city of May apart took over, its ride lasting until around 1450 . In the 14th century, May apart became the largest city in the world .
 Aztecs were one of the 15th-century rulers in Mesoamerica . They claimed descent from the Toltecs, a legendary people who had inhabited the semimythical paradise city of Tula .
 The Toltecs included groups from the Gulf coast as well as Nahuatl speakers originally from the “barbarian” lands to the north . Its inhabitants included groups of groups from Gulf coast to the ‘barbararian’ lands .
 Monumental sculptures and other artwork at Tula show the Toltecs as warriors and practising the Mesoamerican rituals of captive sacrifice and the ballgame .
 Toltecs played a major role in trading networks which stretched as far north as the Pueblo area of southwestern North America . The Toltec remained at Tula and dominated a large area of central Mexico . The area was the source of highly-prized turquoise .
 After the collapse of Tula there was probably a major dispersal of its inhabitants, introducing Toltec elements into the Valley of Mexico, Gholula and the Maya area .
 Western Mexico has often been described as the land of ‘enduring villages’, each with deep-shaft tombs containing sculptures of everyday life . The Teuchitlan, Tarascan, Zapotec and Mixtec villages are often described as “enduring
 The concentration of such features in the Teuchitlan Valley, together with raised field agriculture and fortified control points along valleys leading into this area, suggest a unitary state, says historian .
 By the late pre-Gonquest period a local people, speaking an isolated language known as Tarascan, controlled a large area of western Mexico around Lake Patzcuaro . From where they successfully harried the Aztecs, from where they defeated them, the local people
 The Tarascans were exceptional craftsmen, particularly in their working of gold and silver . The Tarasans were an exceptional craftsman, especially in their silver .
 Their emperor, the kasonsi , commissioned stepped platforms known as yacatas, probably the funerary monuments of his ancestors . Their emperor commissioned them to be a funerary monument of his own ancestors .
 In a dualistic pattern also common in central Mexico, the kasonsi shared power with a powerful priest . In the same pattern, the priest was also powerful enough to take power .
 To the southeast of the Tarascan kingdom, in the Oaxaca Valley, were the Mixtecs . The Mixtecans were the first to arrive in the region .
 Zapotecs constructed a fortified stronghold with fine palaces . They continued to practise sacrificial rites until the arrival of the Spanish .
 By 1350 they controlled the Oaxaca Valley and influenced neighbouring regions as far as Gholula . They controlled the region by 1350 . By 1360 they had control of the region .
 Both the Mixtecs and Zapotecs suffered at the hands of the Aztecs, but neither people was ever completely conquered . Like the Tarascan Empire, both cultures would soon be destroyed by powerful European invaders .
 Trading communities prospered along the coast, particularly behind the protection of the barrier reef on the east coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, and in the southwest, home of the Putun Mayo, who operated a major maritime network .
 The threat from the north farted the Song to mountain n massive professional army, which by 1040 contained over 1,250,000 men . By 1040, the Song had a professional army of more than 1,500,000 .
 Military expenditure exploded and the production of el arms and armour rearhed unprecedented rotes . The production of weapons and armour was unprecedented .
 The reunified Chinese Empire was rather different in character from its Tang predecessor . The Chinese Empire is rather different than its predecessor .
 Central Asia had been lost, and Central Asia was lost . Liao state in the northeast was controlled by the Khitan people, the Xixia state by the Tan gut people . The XIXia state in northwest was the . northwest by the . Tan Gut people .
 The Khitan and the Tangut were non-Chinese, and the north presented a constant military threat to the Song . The Song was defeated by the Khitan in the Song dynasty .
 Initially the Song emperors established the northern city of Kaifeng as their capital . Initially the city was established as the capital of the Song dynasty .
 After the loss of much of northern China to Jurchen invaders, the Song established a second capital further south in Hangzhou . Hangzhou was the second capital of the Song dynasty .
 Culture and economy of the Song period saw a great revival in Confucianism, regarded as the native Chinese philosophy, at the expense of Buddhism, which had been imported from India during the Tang period . Buddhism had been brought from India in the Tang era .
 The class of scholar-officials burgeoned as great emphasis was placed on civil service examination . Civil service examination began during the Han period and continued under the Tang rulers .
 By the end of the era some 400,OfK3 candidates sat exams each year, sometimes with hundreds of aspirants chasing :i single post .
 Scholarly families fuelled a demand for the many new books of all sorts that the improvements in printing, such as woodblock printing and the use of moving type, allowed to be produced .
 The Song era also witnessed new artistic forms, notably the rise of landscape painting . Emperor Huizong was blamed for the loss of the north because he allowed his interests in art to distract him from government .
 This demographic growth was accompanied by great economic growth and an expansion in mercantile activity, notably in waterborne trade, facilitated by the world’s first paper money . The world of paper money was the world's first currency .
 The development of an unregulated property market led to the appearance of huge estates . Vast new tracts of land were opened up for agriculture, and the development of a property market .
 All across China new cities flourished, often starting out as bustling markets hut with tea houses and shops soon added to attract traders and customers .
 Marco Polo described Hangzhou as the finest and most splendid city in the world . Marco Polo was to describe the later Song capital of Hangzhou in the 13th century . Hangzhou was to be described by Marco Polo as the world's finest and the most splendid .
 The Liao state in the northeast was a union of a number of Khitan tribes originally from the margins of the Manchurian steppe brought together by the ruler Abaoji in the early 10th century .
 Khitan state was ruled by the Khitan and ruled over by the three million Chinese ruled by Khitan . Their state comprised a solidly Khitan northern part and a southern part . The southern part was divided into 16 provinces and occupied mostly by Chinese .
 Khitan repeatedly attacked the Koryo kingdom in Korea from the late 10th century . Khitan captured the capital Kaegyong in 1011, capturing the capital in 10101 .
 By the 12th century a new power had emerged in the northeast a confederation of Jurchen tribes from the mountains of eastern Manchuria . The Jurchen confederation was formed in the north of China in the 11th century .
 The Song dynasty survived in the south until 1279, when the whole country fell to the Mongols . They were, in their turn, to be replaced in 1368 by the Ming dynasty . In 1368 they were replaced by the Chinese dynasty .
 On the Korean Peninsula the Koryo kingdom lasted until 1392 . The kingdom was ruled by Koryos from 1392 until 1383 .
 The later years of the dynasty were marked by repeated incursions by northern nomads and, from 1231, a series of invasions by Mongol armies . From 1231 onwards, the Mongol armies invaded the kingdom .
 In 1232 the court was forced to flee the capital to Kanghwa Island . By 1259 the government had accepted Mongol domination . In 1259, the government accepted Mongol rule .
 Hanyong, modern Seoul, replaced Kaegyong as the capital and in October 1446 Hangul, the new Korean script, was promulgated . Hangul was a popular language in Korea .
 Employing a phonetic alphabet, which can be learnt much more quickly than Chinese ideographs, this script brought literacy to the peasants . It enabled the gradual appearance of a vernacular literature . The script was used by the peasants and enabled the appearance of the language of the vern
 In Japan the seat of government shifted from Kyoto to Kamakura in 1185 as military overlords, or shoguns, took power from the emperor in Kyoto .
 The Kamakura period saw the development of the militaristic samurai culture . The samurai culture was developed during the Kamakura era .
 Among technical innovations was the use of moveable type, leading to the world's first casting of metal type in HO 3 . Cultural achievements included the publication af the first Korean histories .
 Mongols launched against Japan from Korea from Korea by the Mongols . South China Sea expeditions were launched from Korea in 18th century .
 During the Onin Wars, which began in 1467 and continued for over a century, Japan was wracked by bloody civil conflict . Power returned to the imperial capital of Kyoto in the Ashikaga or Muromachi period .
 Christianity arrived in 1543, accompanied by new tools of war, including castle architecture and flintlock guns . Christianity arrived along with the arrival of Christianity .
 Hideyoshi failed in his first invasion of Korea in 1592 . His force of 160,000 men aiming to conquer China after subduing Korea were thwarted by the Korean admiral Yi Sun-Sin .
 Hideyoshi died in his second attempt to conquer Korea in 1597 . Japanese incursions into Korea were met with counterattacks by combined Ming Chinese and Korean forces .
 Tokugawa Ieyasu closed the doors of Japan to the outside world . He established the Tokugawawa Shogunate and closed the Japanese doors to the world . Power passed to Ieyasas, who established the Shogunate .
 The 16th century in Japan is known as the era of the Warring States, or Sengoku period, during which regional warlords fought each other to win control of the country .
 When it ended, the Japanese rulers set their sights on conquering Korea . The Japanese rulers wanted to conquer Korea .
 Abbasid caliph., previously dominant From Ihe Atlantic la India, were replaced by a series of regional dynasties . The Abbasid was reduced to little more than a religious figurehead .
 Most of the Muslim world with the notable exception of Umayyad Spain had been lost by the luth century . Yet the political and religious unity provided by the Abbasid Caliphate was lost . The political unity provided for most of the world by the Caliphate .
 Abbasid Empire luid fragmented and ihe central lands of Egypt and Iraq were occupied by the Fat 1m ids and the Liny ids, both Shiite states that rejected the Sunni caliph's religious authority .
 Under Malik Shah., the Sejuk-Id war bonds of ihe Oguz Turin reunited much of the old Abbasid Empire . ihe . O/MAN* Jctwne* BUY1D SULTAN WE FAT1MID CAUPHATE
 His authority was based loosely on a combination of personal prestige ond the ability to distribute material reward to more ar less autonomous subordinate rulers, each with his own warrior following .
 In the far west the Umayyad Caliphate was close to collapse and partitioned between successor states the ta\fa kingdoms and the Maghreb was dis ided between several Berber dynasties .
 The major power in the east was the Ghaznavids, a Turkish dynasty of former slave soldiers . The only rivals were the recently converted Turkish Qarakhanids and the still largely non-Muslim Turkish nomads, especially the Oguz, on the steppe to the north
 In 1038, the Oguz Turks converted to Sunni Islam, rather than Shiite Islam . The Seljuk dynasty invaded Iran in 1038 . In 1039, the Turks invaded Iran and converted to Islam .
 Victory over the Ghaznavids at Dan dan kail enabled the Seljuks to create a loose Sunni empire that stretched from the edge uf the steppe to Anatolia and Palestine* The religious* if not the political, authority of the Abbasid caliph was restored,
 Seljuk era was over in Syria by 1117, and in most of eastern Iran by 1156 . Seljuks continued to rule in parts of western Iran as late as 1194, but the Seljaks were still in control of Syria .
 Only in Anatolia did an independent branch of the Seljuk dynasty flourish into the 13th century . Only in the Anatolia region, the dynasty flourished in the 12th century.
 One beneficiary of Seljuk decline were the Abbasid caliphs, who enjoyed a new-found political independence in southern Iraq . The unify fostered by the Sdfula in the 11th century was Illusory .
 Reliant on continued military expansion to provide the rewords coveted by local leaders, it was not sustainable In the long term . Reliant . on continued . military expansion, it is not sustainable .
 In the 12th century the Muslim world fragmented into a series of regional authorities which made possible gains by the Byzantines, crusaders, nomads and others at ihe expense of particular Muslim communities .
 Several of these lineages, including the Zengids, the Ildegizids and the Salghurids, had their origins as atahegs, holders of delegated Seljuk authority . The Avyubids and Ghurids were two important exceptions the Av
 The Ayyuhids were a Kurdish dynasty who began as soldiers serving the Zougids . They were the first to fight for the kingdom . They are the descendants of the ancient Zougid dynasty .
 The Ghurids were an Iranian dynasty from a tribal background in eastern Iran . They were from tribal backgrounds . They are from the eastern region of Iran and were from the region of eastern Iran.
 The late 12th century was a period of calm before a storm which threatened the complete destruction of Islam . Saladin and the Ghurids were the age of the era when the Mongol invasions began .
 Baghdad was sacked in 1258, and the last generally recognized Abbasid caliph put to death . Baghdad was the capital of the Abbasid state of the city .
 In the West, Christian armies were conquering most of Muslim Spain and in 1217-21, and again in 1249-50, they threatened to seize Cairo and end Muslim rule In Egypt . Christian armies conquered most of the remaining Muslim Spain .
 Islam as a religion and culture also proved capable of converting some of Its conquerors . Islam also proved able to convert some of its conquerors, including the Egyptians .
 The Golden Horde and the 11 khan Empire had converted to Islam by the early 14th century . A1 though the Spanish Christians proved resistant, both the Golden . Horde and 11 . khan . Empire converted to Islamic by the 14th Century .
 Muslim survival was also due to fierce resistance In India from the sultans of Delhi, in Syria and Palestine from the Mam Ink rulers of Egypt .
 In 1250, after the French crusader invasion landed, the leaders of one of the main mamluk regiments murdered the last Ayyubid sultan in Egypt and seized power .
 By the beginning of the 14th century the Mamluk regime had permanently halted the Mongol advance and expelled the crusaders from their last coveted territories .
 T Mongol military power conquered much of the Muslim world in ihe 13fh (Hilary. 13th century) T Mongol power conquered most of the world .
 This empire was passed on with relatively minor geographical alteration thereafter to his son and grandson and then to his Sal km, Staufeti .
 By taking the imperial title, Otto was deliberately presenting himself as the successor of Charlemagne restorer of the Christian empire in the west in order to enhance his prestige . When Frederick Barbarossa succeeded to the same kingship and imperial status, he reaffirmed the continuing tradition by inst
 Emperor-elect chosen by German princes travelled south across the Alps to secure recognition in northern Italy and coronation by the Pope in Koine . But there was little governmental substance to his position in Italy .
 Between the tnid-lOth and mid11th centuries the Liudolfing and Kalian emperors spent lengthy periods south of the Alps . Between the mid-11th century and mid-14th century the emperors were in the middle of the world .
 His grandson's renewed attempt in 1236-50 to master Lombardy was thwarted by the alliance of communes and Papacy . His son successfully took over Sicily and southern Italy in 1194, but his grandson's grandson's attempt was thwarted . The Papacy and communes of Lomb
 The pattern of northern intervention in Italy survived the Staufens* loss of the Sicilian as well as the German kingship in 1254-68 .
 Henry of Luxembourg in 1310-13 and Ludwig of Witte I shach in 1328 . Imperial jurisdiction south of the Alps was merely theoretical . However, after the expeditions of Henry of . Luxembourg of Luxembourg and Ludwig . of . Witte . of 1328.
 In Germany the kings position was stronger than in Italy, yet here too the force of localism was of primary importance . In practice, government and politics evolved as an autonomous system of local regimes .
 German expansion to c 1 3q0 Bairajnty d the Uointin Empire 1354 Aim flf Germgn saMfemanr Atad where German lawn taw used Tavflu aid hade .
 It was impossible for any single authority to exert control over large and diverse an area . Even when in Germany as elsewhere in the 12th and 13th centuries more bureaucratic governmental techniques were developed, they were developed .
 Local rulers might be noble dynasts, communal associations in individual ‘free towns’, or more varied groupings . These local rulers may be noble dynastyasts or communal associations .
 The diversity and the extent of German society were enhanced between the 10th and 14th centuries by largescale expansion eastwards . Eastward expansion was part of the development of German culture .
 Saxon Liudolfings gained acceptance as kings through their successful military leadership in warfare against the Slavs east of the Elbe . They fought the Magyars who, from 900, were raiding along the Danube Valley .
 After the 11th century, kings and emperors had little to do with such expansion . King and emperor had little influence on expansion of the kingdom .
 Local dynasties such as the Babenbergs in Austria or the Wettins in Meissen recruited the necessary human resources of peasant farmers and urban traders . Instead of military and juridical organization, local dynasts recruited human resources such as farmers and traders .
 This movement of eastward expansion far exceeded even the expanded limits of the Empire . The Empire's princes attended the Reichstag and engaged in the politics of elective kingship .
 Throughout east-central Europe, with the active encouragement of local rulers, German communities were induced to settle alongside Slav and Magyar populations . German communities, equipped with German customary law, were equipped with customary law .
 The Wendish Crusade from 1147 to 1185, waged by German princes and Danish kings, brought forcible Christianization to Holstein, Mecklenburg and Pomerania . It was fought by the Danish kings and German princes .
 A further series of crusades developed after 1200 in the east Baltic area of Livonia, extending into Finland by the 1240s under the impetus of Swedish conquest . The crusades continued in Livonia and Finland by 1200s and 1200s .
 From the 1220s the Teutonic Order acquired independent rule in Prussia and from there waged the “Perpetual Crusade” against the pagan Lithuanians . Most notably, from the 1230s onwards the Order acquired independence from Prussia . From there they waged the
 The 12th and 13th centuries also saw the creation of a network of German maritime enterprise in the Baltic . The Hanseatic League was formed in the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries .
 The timber, furs and grain of Scandinavia, northern Russia, and the southern hinterland of the Baltic were shipped westwards . Return cargoes of cloth and other manufactured commodities were also sent westward .
 League linked the newly founded German towns on the southern Baltic coast between Liibeck and Riga, both southwards to the German hinterland and the newly exploited lands to the east .
 Throughout t is area local rulers awarded grants of privilege in reti n for profit-sharing arrangements, thus contributing tj German economic and cultural expansion within Europe . Throughout the region local rulers won grants of . privilege in . profit-share arrangements .
 In the 1220s the Teutonic Order contributed to the defence of Hungary and Poland against their pagan neighbours in Transylvania and Prussia . The Order established control over Prussia and Livonia in the following decades .
 The Cwdingionv V Hie kings ol Afogan were united in 11.37 with the already powerful counts of Barcelona . They used the growing commercial wealth of the port of Barcelona to extend their control to saulhern France .
 Much political control in Franco, Spain, England and other areas of western Europe was devolved to local landowning aristocracies who built castles and employed armoured knights to assert their power over the peasants . Depending on circumstances, these local magnates came more or less under the control of
 Carolingian kings had been immensely successful in harnessing the aristocracy in a common enterprise . During the 8th and early 9th centuries the French Carolingians were immensely successful . The kingdom of France was founded by the Carolinges .
 By the end of the 10th century royal power and the political structure of West Franeia were undergoing a fundamental transformation . However, the royal power of the kingdom was under attack .
 Carolingian lands in West Franeia had been given away or sold off in an attempt to buy support . The French kings hail soon been reduced to comparative impotence .
 The extent of power devolved varied from area to area, and authority by no means remained stable . In the county of Macon, for example, the counts had largely thrown off the authority of the dukes of Burgundy bv 980 .
 By 1030 the local castle-holders (castellans) and great churches were in effect independent, with their own courts exercising private justice “banal lordship"" over a large subject population . As a result, by about 1030, the local castles and churches were independent
 By the 12th century three factors tended to favour larger and more coherent political units . The consolidation of power was a key factor in the development of the kingdom .
 Growing profits arising from customs, tolls and urban expansion were more easily exploited by regional powers than by independent castellans . The growing profits arose from customs and tolls .
 As trade across Europe increased, the taxation of its profits at regional level made kings and other greater lords a dominating social force . The taxation of regional profits made kings a dominating force in Europe .
 The spread of feudal relations enabled kings, on the basis of their growing wealth, to impose greater obligations on their castle-holding subjects . Third, the spread enabled kings to impose obligations on castle-holders .
 Controlling and directing the re con quest of Muslim Spain was a further lever of power in the hands of Christian Spanish monarchs . Controlling the re-conquest of Spanish Muslims was a key lever in Christian monarchs' power .
 Christian kingdoms terrorized successor states to the once-powerful Muslim Umayyads . They held out against counterattack of the Berber Almoravids and Almohads before overrunning must of what was left of Muslim territory in 13th century .
 During the 10th and early 11th centuries the Anglo-Saxon kings faced the threat of Viking conquest . In the process forged a sophisticated and centrally controlled administrative machine .
 A network of shires was created, and royal mints enabled the Crown to enforce a standardized coinage . The Crown gained a considerable income through regular rernm tings .
 Norman Conquest in 1066 paradoxically reinforced the English state, sweeping away aristocratic rivals to the crown . Its advance into Scotland came to a halt in 1314 at the Sank of Bannockburn, Scotland .
 As in Spain, royal power in England benefited from controlled expansion and the distribution of profits arising from it . The Spanish royal rule was similar to that of Spain .
 In France, luck and political skill favoured the Capetiam . Capetian dominance in France was dominated by the French state .
 The death of Henry IPs son Richard l in 1199 opened the way for the French king, Philip Augustus , to deprive Riehards brother John of French lands, including Normandy and Anjou, in a series of campaigns .
 Paris became the uncontested political and administrative hub of the kingdom . Paris became an intellectual centre for the whole of Latin Christendom . Paris was the undisputed political hub for the entire kingdom .
 For the Pope the expedition was a response to Byzantine appeals for help in the wake of the Turkish conquest of Anatolia . Despite many appeals, the Owhlwo rulers of ihe Crusader Stoles were unable to attract wffodenl military manpower .
 Many western Europeorts did senle in ihe East, but mast regarded crusading activity as an extended pilgrimage . More than a new life as a colonial elite .
 By the time the expedition reached Jerusalem there were 14,000 crusaders . Tut; Cm sad eh States .
 Their initial success owed a great deal to the temporary political divisions in the Muslim world . Their success was partly due to temporary political division in the Middle East . The Muslim world is divided by political divisions .
 The death of the powerful Seljuk sultan Malik Shah in 1092 had plunged the sultanate into a complex civil war . Malik Shah's death in 1091 plunged the country into a bloody civil war in the 1092 .
 Malik Shah s son Borkyaruk kept control of the area of present-day Iraq and Iran . Kid wan and Dukak, the sons of his uncle and chief opponent, Tutush , still ruled in Aleppo and Damascus respectively .
 The brothers were loath to co-operate with each other, with Kerbogha (the Seljuk governor of Mosul) or with the Shiite Fatimid Caliphate in Egypt . The Fathn ids had ruled most of Syria and Palestine through the 11th century
 The Second Crusade (1146-48) failed to take Damascus, and after 1154 the situation changed significantly . After 1154, the situation in Syria changed significantly.
 Nur al-Din deliberately underpinned his authority with an ideology of holy war against the crusaders . In that year Mosul, Aleppo and Damascus were united under the aggressive leadership of Nur .
 The decline of the Shiite Fa Li m id Caliphate also altered the balance of power . Egypt's agricultural and commercial riches were potentially the key to domination of the Levant .
 Nur al-Din sent one of his generals, a Kurd called Saladin, to keep the crusaders out of Egypt . However, attempts led by King Amalrie of Jerusalem between 116A and 1169 to conqueror control Egypt merely encouraged .
 After Nur al-Din s death in I 174, Saladin gradually dispossessed his former master's heirs . By 1186 they had been forced to recognize Saladin's overlordship .
 Saladin inflicted a crushing defeat on the Crusaders at the Battle of I hit tin, near the Sea of Cali lee . Saladin was now able to wage war with the combined resources of Egypt anil Syria .
 The crusaders' hold on the Holy Land was threatened by the rise of Saladin and the unification of Egypt and Syria . Saladin's rise was the result of his unification of Syria and Egypt . The Crusaders were able to hold on to their Holy Land .
 Richard I of England came close to reversing Saladin's 1187 conquest of Jerusalem . However, during the Third Crusade, Richard I came near to reversing the conquest .
 Latin territories in the eastern Mediterranean reached their greatest extent in the early 13th century . At the same time Western enthusiasm for crusading only continued to grow, and in fact Latin territories .
 The Fifth Crusade, with contingents from Germany, Italy, Austria, Hungary, England and France, appeared close to success in Egypt before its final defeat in 1221 .
 The French king Louis IX invested enormous resources on crusading in the east, but his Egyptian expedition of 1249-50 ended in disaster .
 The powerful Mamluk state which replaced the Ayyubids after 1250 was initially more concerned with the imminent threat from the Mongols . As that receded the Mamluks advance proved relentless, culminating in 1291 in the fall of Acre, last of the major crus
 The crusading movement between 1095 and 1291 is striking evidence of the militaristic nature of Western aristocratic culture . The establishment of military orders was established by the Crusades in 1095 .
 It also reflects the importance of European sea power, especially that of Venice and Genoa, whose ships carried many of the crusaders to Palestine . The crusaders were sent to Palestine by European sea powers .
 European maritime power grew to dominate the Mediterranean, creating a base of experience for later expansion to the Americas and the East . During this period European maritime powers grew to dominance of the Mediterranean .
 The failure to maintain crusader settlement in the Levant reflects the strength of Muslim opposition, but also the inadequacy of crusader manpower and resources . The failure of the Crusades to maintain settlement reflects the weakness of the Muslim opposition and resources, says historian .
 Even at their greatest extent in the 1140s the Crusader States amounted to little more than an embattled coastal strip . The Crusader States were little more of a coastal strip than a coastal region .
 Hospital of St John and Knights Templar established by 1139 of the military orders of the Hospital of Saint John and the Knights Templar . The Knights Templar were established in 1139 after the Hospital was established by St John .
 Hospitallers and the Templars soon acquired extensive properties in the West which gave them the financial strength the settlers lacked . Effectively knights living by monastic rule, both the Hospitalls and Templars were soon to have extensive properties .
 From the 1140s onwards many crusader lords found it necessary to hand over their more exposed strongholds to the military . The military orders alone had the means to maintain and defend them .
 Soon after its inception the crusading idea was transferred to other contexts . Soon after it was created, the idea of crusading began to be transferred to others .
 Also treated as crusades were expeditions to crush heresy, such as the Albigensian Crusade in southern France and those against the Hussites in Bohemia (1420-21, 1427, 1431), as well as political opponents of the Papacy .
 Emperor Frederick II was the target of a papal crusade in 1240-50 . Frederick II had actually taken part in a crusade against the papal in 1228-29 .
 Crusading remained deeply rooted in Western chivalric and popular culture through to the Reformation of the 16th century . Even after 1291 crusading, crusading remained rooted in popular culture in the West .
 The Templars were suppressed in 1312 in the wake of heresy charges brought by Philip IV of France . The Hospitallers survived on Rhodes until 1522, on Malta until 1798, and do so still in Rome .
 In the modern Islamic world the crusading movement has come to be seen as evidence of the long and bloody past of Western Christian imperialism . The crusades movement is seen as a sign of Western imperialism in the Islamic world .
 Emperor Frederick II in 1229 recovered Jerusalem by negotiation . Ironically, more was achieved by the excommunicate crusader, Frederick II .
 The principality it served one of the four Crusader States remained a Christian outpost for nearly two centuries . It is now a French principality .
 Byzantine defeat in the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 enabled the Seljuk Turks to establish themselves in Anatolia . Normans took over Byzantine territory in southern Italy .
 Territory in Europe came under the control of a Frankish emperor, who tried unsuccessfully to convert the populace to Catholicism, while the centre of Orthodox power shifted to Nicaea in northern Anatolia .
 Byzantine warrior emperor Basil II died in 1025 . He left an empire that had doubled in size during his reign . He presented a serious challenge to its Muslim neighbours .
 Basil's reign was a success story for the Byzantine Empire . However, subsequent emperors could not maintain the impetus achieved under Basil .
 They became embroiled in ecclesiastical politics that provoked the ‘Great Schism’ of 1054 a theological split between the Orthodox and Western churches that has effectively lasted ever since . The Orthodox and the Western churches were embroiled in the ecclesiastic politics .
 The schism invited hostility from the West at a time when Muslim power was regrouping, it was said . The West was at the heart of the schism .
 The crusades temporarily transformed the politics of the Near East by taking Muslim pressure away from Constantinople only to bring the city under increasing Western or Frankish influence . The city is now under increasing influence .
 Constantinople enjoyed a brief economic boom as a major staging post for western Europeans on the road to Jerusalem . In the 12th century Constantinople was a major economic boom for the western world .
 The empire’s finances were fundamentally weak and the Byzantines could meet their commitments only by granting commercial concessions to their erstwhile dependency, Venice . Venice was a key part of the empire's finances, but the empire was fundamentally weak .
 Byzantine economy became increasingly dominated by Venetian merchants in Constantinople . From 1171 onwards Byzantine rulers attempted to cut back Venetians interests in the city . Byzantine rulers tried to reduce the influence of the merchants in the area .
 Anti-Venetian riots in Constantinople at a time when the empire was increasingly threatened in the Balkans and Anatolia . This promoted tension and led ultimately to anti- Venetian riot in Constantinople .
 In 1204 the old blind Venetian doge, Enrico Dandolo, successfully engineered the diversion of the Fourth Crusade away from Jerusalem and towards Constantinople . The old blind doge managed to divert the 4th Crusade from Jerusalem to Constantinople .
 The sea walls were breached for the first time and the city was captured and systematically looted over a period of three days . The sea wall was breached by the city's sea walls .
 The Byzantine Empire was to mark the beginning of the Byzantine Empire’s fragmentation . This event was to begin the beginning the Byzantine empire's fragmentation .
 Venice dominated the Greek islands and made a particularly lasting mark in and around Naxos . It proved impossible to graft Catholicism and an alien feudalism onto rural Greek society .
 Greek rule survived in Western Anatolia, based at Nicaea, and also in Epirus and in Trebizond on the Black Sea .
 It was the Greek Emperor of Nicaea, Michael VIII Palaeologus, who recaptured Constantinople for Orthodoxy in 1261 . The Emperor of the Nicaea recaptured the city in Nicaea . The Empire of the Empire was the first to recapture Constantinople .
 It was hedged in by quarrelling rivals threatened to the north by Balkan Slavic peoples and in Anatolia by the Turks . Furthermore, it was also hedged by the threat of the Turks and its neighbours .
 By the mid-14th century Greece had fallen to the Serbs, who were countered not by Byzantine forces but by advancing Muslim power . The Serbs were defeated by the Muslim forces in the 14th century .
 Thereafter the Byzantine polity dwindled into a diplomatic entity based on what was effectively the citystate of Constantinople . The Byzantine city state was effectively known as the city state of Constantinople. The city state is now known as Constantinople .
 Ottoman rulers claimed descent from Osman, the most prominent of the Muslim ‘ghazis” who, in the 13th century, established independent fiefdoms amid the political ruins of what had formerly been Byzantine .
 Ottoman society and culture were profoundly Islamic, but with a distinctive ethos derived from Central Asian nomadic antecedents . Ottoman society was profoundly Islamic but with distinctive ethos of nomadic people .
 Osman’s son, Orhan Ghazi, was able to move his capital as far west as Bursa and marry a daughter of the Byzantine Emperor John VI Gantacuzene .
 Byzantine culture gradually lost, or abandoning, its long struggle with Islam in the interior of Asia Minor . This marriage epitomized the steady increase of Turkish influence in medieval Anatolia .
 Advances into Serbia, culminating in the Battle of Kosovo Polje in 1389, put an end to Serbian expansion . Advances in Serbia culminated in the 1389 Battle of Kosotni Polje, ending Serbian expansion of Serbia .
 At the same time the Ottomans consolidated their control of Asia Minor, and an Ottoman navy came into being . The Ottoman navy was plying the waters of the Mediterranean, Aegean and Adriatic . It was the first navy to sail in the Mediterranean and the Adri
 Byzantine Constantinople was living on borrowed time. Byzantine Constantinople now living on a borrowed time . The defeat of Constantinople was the defeat of the Empire .
 The Classical and Post-Classical heritage of Constantinople was still impressive, despite the ravages of 1204 . The Classical heritage of the city is still impressive .
 Its latter-day scholars were slipping away towards Renaissance Italy, taking their manuscripts with them . However, its latter-by-standers were slipping into Renaissance Italy .
 Ottoman victories had been won with the aid of Balkan and other mercenaries . Since the 14th century Ottoman victories were won by the help of the Balkan, other mercenaries.
 Constantinople, as a Christian bastion, continued to receive the political sympathy of western Europe . This was bedevilled by mutual suspicion which the token reunion of the Greek and Latin churches could not dispel .
 The Greeks feared papal aggrandiement and they had long seen unruly Western mercenaries and ambitious Italian merchants as more threatening than the Ottoman Turks . The Greeks had long feared the papal's papal influence .
 The Ottomans broke through the walls of the city on 29 May 1453 the last day of the Roman Empire and the first day of a mature Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire would continue to expand until the 17th century .
 In 1361 an Orthodox ruler was restored in Constantinople in the form of the Emperor of Nicaea . By the mid-14th century the Ottomans had taken control of northwest Anatolia and were making inroads into Europe .
 The restored Byzantine Empire was powerless to resist . From the northwest the Serbs were also expanding, and the restored Byzantine empire was powerless .
 In 1453 the Ottomans successfully used cannon to break down the city's outer walls . A cannon cannon broke down the walls of Constantinople in 1453 .
 They also gained access to the harbour (the Golden Horn), despite a Byzantine blockade, by dragging their ships out of the Bosporus and across a stretch of land . The feat was the feat of dragging the ships across the sea .
 Ottoman pillage of Constantinople depicted here in a Romanian wall painting lasted for three days and nights before Sultan Mehmet II restored order . Sultan Memet II was Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, who ruled the city for three years .
 In 1453 they captured Constantinople and expanded westwards to control the Balkans as far north as Belgrade . The Ottomar captured Constantinople in 1453 . In 1454 they captured the city of Constantinople and extended westwards .
 Il did not survive as a united empire beyond 1260 when it splil into a number of khanates whose rulers went on to conquer further territories ntosl China in 1279 .
 Great Khan Ogodei was killed by the Great Khan of the Mongol Empire . The Great Khan died in his last year of his Mongol age .
 Mongol forces launched a devastating campaign in the winter of 1237-38 against the cities of Russian principalities . Mongol forces were able to bring Turkic nomadic populations under control of the steppe .
 In 1240 the Battle of Kozelsk depicted in this illustration from a 16th-century Russian chronicle resulted in the city of Kiev being razed to the ground of the Khwarazm-shah .
 Great destruction wrought on the cities of Bukhara and Samarqand and in the area south of the Oxus . Great destruction was wrought upon the cities and areas of the region .
 A rudimentary Mongol administrative apparatus was set up in Iran, which grew into the bureaucracy that ruled the country into the 14th century . The Mongolian administrative apparatus grew into Iran's bureaucracy, which ruled the nation .
 There were several reasons for Chinggis Khan's success in establishing a widespread tribal empire which outlived him .
 He built a large army of top-quality soldiers the traditional horse-archers of the Eurasian steppe, experts in the tactics of concerted mass assault, whom he infused with iron discipline .
 He had the foresight and talent to cultivate a cadre of extremely capable and loyal generals . An effective military leader himself himself, he cultivated a strong and loyal army .
 He introduced several changes that laid the groundwork for a long-term Mongol administration . He introduced the adoption of an alphabet for the Mongolian language and the basic tenets of a financial system .
 He propagated an imperialist ideology premised on the assumption that the Mongols had a heavengiven “mandate” to conquer the world . Finally, he propagated a imperialist ideology, premising on the assumptions that the Mongolians had a ‘mandate to conquer�
 All those who resisted this mandate were rebels against the heavenly order and could be dealt with accordingly . Those who resisted the mandate would be dealt out accordingly, he says .
 Chinggis Khan died in 1227, on campaign in China . He was followed as Great Khan by his second son, Ogodei . His rule continued to expand .
 In China the Jin Empire was eliminated in 1234, and war began with the southern Song . War began with southern Song, which was defeated by Jin Empire .
 In the Middle East all of Iran and the Caucasus were subjugated in the 1230s, and most of Anatolia followed in 1243 . In the 1240s and 1243s, most of the region was subjugated .
 In the aftermath of the death of the fourth Great Khan Mongke, a grandson of Chinggis Khan, the Mongol Empire effectively split up into a number of successor states . The successor khanates include Mongolistan, Mongolistan and Mongolistan .
 In China and the Mongolian heartland, Qubilai a brother of Mongke established the Yuan dynasty, and had conquered all of China by 1279 . The Yuan dynasty was established by Mongke in 1279 and ruled by the Mongke dynasty .
 Mongol conquest was accompanied by much destruction, particularly in the north . Not all aspects of Mongol rule were negative, but not all were .
 Trade appears to have flourished and the country was united for the first time in centuries . Trade appeared to be thriving and trade appears to be flourishing .
 From West Asia there was an influx of cultural influences in such areas as medicine, mathematics and astronomy . Inventors from West Asia were influenced by science and mathematics .
 Mongol rule lasted in China until a series of popular uprisings in the 1360s, from which emerged the first Ming emperor . Large numbers of Mongols left China for the steppe at the time .
 In Central Asia the Khanate of Chaghatai Chinggis Khan’s third son gradually coalesced under his descendants . Further to the west the so-called Golden Horde, ruled by the descendants of Jochi, Jochi Khan, evolved into the Golden Horde .
 Around 1260 there arose in Iran an additional Mongol state known as the Ilkhanate . The state was created from the title Ilkahn by which the rulers were known .
 Ilulegu s troops were stopped at Avn Jalut in northern Palestine in 1260 by the Mamluks of Egypt . The border between the two states was stabilized along the Euphrates though the war between them, at times intense, lasted until 1320 .
 Ilkhans, along with their subjects, converted to Islam around the beginning of the 14th century . Large-scale patronage of Islamic institutions led to large-scale Islamic institutions .
 In Iran, as on the steppe to the north, the Mongols appear to have been absorbed by a larger nomadic Turkish population . The size of the population increased during the period of Mongol domination .
 The empire did not survive his death in 1405 as he had failed to set up an efficient administration . He made no serious provision for his succession .
 Mongol legacy was to continue long after the demise of the united Mongol state in 1260 . This legacy continued long after Mongol state's demise .
 The relatively small number of Mongols, both elite and commoners, were gradually absorbed by the much larger Turkish tribal population . The Mongols adopted Turkic languages while maintaining aspects of Mongol identity and culture .
 Around the same time they converted to Islam, although there were those who resisted the abandonment of traditional Mongol shamanism .
 In its place a number of smaller hordes arose, which were gradually absorbed by the growing Russian state of Muscovy .
 The Tatar, Uzbek and Kazakh peoples were to emerge from the nomadic populations controlled by the Horde . The last two moving eastwards around 1500 to their current locations .
 Trade no longer limited to small quantities of high-value luxury items destined for consumption by rich and privileged elite, but came instead to encompass a wide range of agricultural and manufactured goods . Trade was not only limited to transporting relatively small amounts of luxury items, but instead to include agricultural and manufacturing
 The motors of economic growth were a growing population, a developing market structure, increasing regional and subregional specialization and growing monetarization . The development of commercial instruments (such as bills of exchange and letters of exchange) allowed monetary transactions to extend beyond the availability of coin .
 The clearest evidence that the European population increased comes from the growing number of settlements of all types throughout the continent . Rural and urban growth led to the growth of European settlements in Europe .
 In France, Germany, Italy and England local secular and ecclesiastical lords played decisive roles in the creation of a hierarchy of new market towns . In France and Germany, Germany and Italy, the lords were influential in the development of new towns .
 Founding a market town opened the prospect of a new source of revenue . The lord could now demand the payment of rents and dues in coin, which peasants could now obtain by entering the market themselves .
 Markets encouraged specialization at all levels . Urban craftsmen produced a growing volume of goods for the market, confident that they could obtain food and clothing from the same source .
 Farmers aimed less at self-sufficiency and more at the production of cash crops such as grain, grapes or wool . Similarly, farmers aimed less than self-sufficiency and instead aimed at cash crops like grain or grapes .
 Flanders was dependent on wool from England, grain and wine from the fie de France and the Rhineland . By the 12th century Flanders had become a cloth economy .
 The cloth industry had made Flanders the richest, most densely populated and urbanized region of northern Europe . Flanders is now the richest and most populated region of the continent .
 Italian merchants reached Flanders as early as the beginning of the 12th century . Mediterranean commerce was still limited to northern Europe and the Mediterranean at this time .
 Documents of the Cairo Geniza, an extraordinary Jewish archive amassed from the 11th century onwards, vividly illustrate the growing involvement of Latin merchants, especially Italians, in Mediterranean commerce . The documents were collected by Jewish Jews in the early 12th century .
 More intensive agricultural regimes formed the backbone of economic expansion in Europe . From the mid-llth century their activities were increasingly backed by force . Muslim, Jewish and Greek shipping and much of their trade were all .
 Ibn Jubayr went on a pilgrimage to Mecca in 1183-85 with Genoese ships . He travelled on a small coaster which took him across the Strait of Gibraltar and a boat in which lie crossed the Red Sea .
 Latin states had complete control of the Mediterranean trunk routes by the mid-13th century . As a result the Latin states were able to control the Mediterranean .
 Trading networks established that would continue to flourish for centuries to come. Trading networks were established that . Trading networks set to continue to thrive for centuries .
 Italian, French and Spanish merchants played an increasingly dominant role in the internal trade of these societies . The trade included European goods to North Africa, Egypt and the Byzantine world .
 Islamic gold brought enough to enable Genoa and Florence in 1252, and then Venice in 1284, to strike a regular gold coinage for the first time in Latin Europe since the 8th century .
 Big profits of Mediterranean trade were to he made in the luxuries for which the West was offering the West . However, the balance was heavily in favour of Muslim sellers .
 Interregional trade in northern Europe brought large quantities of German silver into the hands of Flemish, French, Rhenish and English merchants who then paid silver to southern merchants, mostly Italians, in exchange for goods from the East .
 The linchpin of the new trans-Alpine economy was the Champagne fairs, held at Troyes, Bar-sur-Aube, Lagny and Provlns . The powerful counts of Champagne could guarantee security .
 Provins denier (the coinage of Champagne) became the standard coin for commercial payments in northern and central Italy during the second half of the 12th century .
 They brought Mediterranean commercial techniques and firms of Italian bankers to the north . They also brought Mediterranean techniques to the northern part of Italy .
 With the introduction of transferable hills of exchange, the European economy was no longer limited by the availability of precious metal . The European economy no longer restricted by availability of the precious metal, it is said .
 Bankers were willing to offer enormous credit facilities to reliable clients, so that the rulers of the major European states were now given the means to operate on an entirely new scale .
 A Expansion in sectors of the European economy not g«rd 1 q load production is strikingly demonstrated in the phenomenon ol urban growth . Urban growth is a key factor in Europe's economic growth . A
 Towns ad cities provided nranufacluriaig centres and markets for long-distance trade, whether interregicnol or international . Towns and cities were important centres for international trade .
 The crusades was also one of growing Mediterranean commerce . They obo serviced their local agricultural economies, providing markets and goads thal .
 Towns in Europe had tended to decrease in size, complexity and autonomy, particularly within Latin Christendom . A fter the collapse of the Roman Empire at the end of the 4th century, towns in Europe decreased in size .
 In 1000 Europe’s five largest towns Constantinople, Cordoba, Seville, Palermo and Kiev were outside this area . Constantinople was one of the five largest cities in Europe . Cordoba was Cordoba . Seville was also outside of the area .
 Constantinople was still one of the five largest towns, but the other four were now Paris, Milan, Venice, Venice and Naples . Paris was still the largest town, but now Paris was the largest city .
 At this time around 70 per cent of the estimated 80 million inhabitants of Europe lived in the countryside, with a further 20 per cent in small market towns . At the time of the 1930s, Europe was home to around 80 million people .
 Just three million people lived in the hundred or so towns of at least 10,000 inhabitants . The towns represented a social, economic, cultural and political force of far greater importance than their number might suggest .
 During the Middle Ages urban enterprise came to set the pace of social and cultural development in western Europe . Urban enterprise set pace of development in Western Europe during the medieval period .
 Between 1050 and 1150 Italian towns from the Alps as far south as Rome were controlled by communal regimes made up of local men of property and high status . The Italian communes were controlled between 1050 and 1050 .
 The communes achieved power partly by violent assertion but also by the formation of ‘peace associations’ The associations had the declared aim of bringing peace and order to a local area .
 Once in charge, communes directed their energies towards mastering the immediately surrounding territory . This territory was vital for maintaining food supplies and communications .
 The communes ultimately emerged victorious, but the strain of warfare and social tensions often fuelled recurrent factional conflicts . The strain was the result of large-scale immigration from the countryside .
 In northwest Europe the forms of town government varied . Towns in northwest Europe were formed from small towns to small towns .
 From around 1100, communes were set up by local revolt, or by local lords granting jurisdictional privilege . Here too, from around 1100 to 1100, they were also set up in France .
 Paris and London developed as royal residences and capitals of kingdoms . The towns of the Low Countries, although prone to turbulence, remained within the framework of territorial principalities .
 The county of Flanders was divided into four territorial-jurisdictional sectors known as the ‘Four Members’ Three of which were dominated by the towns of Ghent, Bruges and Ypres . Three of the four members of the Flanders county were Ghent
 Much of the business of government was transacted not by the count’s officials, but in the regular meetings of representatives of the Four Members . The count's officials were responsible for much of the government's business .
 From the early 14th century only a few communes in Italy escaped princely control . Venice, intermittently Genoa and Lucca, and Florence before the Medici coup of 1434 .
 45 per cent lived in towns but no single town exceeded 16,000 inhabitants in Holland . This demographic pattern was even more pronounced in Holland, where the population is in towns . Holland has the highest proportion of population in the world .
 Around 35 communities with over 2,000 inhabitants and around 3,000 with some sort of recognized town status . By the 15th century urban development in Germany had produced 35 communities .
 Unlike their Italian counterparts, they rarely engaged in warfare . Also unlike their Italian counterpart, they did not engage in combat .
 Even after trade guilds had occasionally asserted themselves forcefully in the 14th and 15th centuries, the towns remained under the control of a small number of noble families .
 By this date the German towns were enjoying a golden age of economic growth and cultural vitality . A vitality that had been a feature of European urban society since the 12th century .
 The great town halls of communal Italy were built mainly between 1260 and 1330 around the lifetime of the poet Dante and his fellow Florentine, Giotto .
 Florence continued to loom especially large in the visual arts, with architecture and sculpture expressing a ‘classical’ ideal inspired by the Graeco-Roman past .
 Florence produced writers such as Boccaccio and Petrarch . Petrarch's humanist Latin writings became formative in education of the elite throughout Latin Christendom in the course of the 15th century . Florence also produced vernacular poems and prose rapidly influenced French and English writing
 The “new art” of the painters and musicians of the Low Countries was much in demand in 15th-century Italy . Artists and writers were, literally, citizens of a world of Renaissance culture .
 Diirer moved between his native Nuremberg, Venice and Antwerp . Erasmus travelled constantly between Gouda, Deventer, Paris, London, Bologna, Rome, Leuven, Freiburg and Basel .
 Antwerp had become the leading commercial and cultural centre of western Europe . Despite the protection of local interests by the occupational guilds, there was considerable economic and cultural exchange between towns so much so that the city had become a major commercial centre .
 They dealt extensively in the bales of cloth which so often harboured fleaborne infection . They also dealt extensively with bales which often contained flebansans .
 The danse macabre entered court entertainment, and artists and sculptors experimented with the grisly themes of the cadaver and the skull .
 15th-century fresco from the Italian School entitled The Triumph of Death is a direct descendant of the genre spawned by the plague a century earlier . The ‘Old World’ may have lost between a quarter and half of its population as a result of the plague .
 The infective agent or plague bacillus was, and is, endemic to the ecology of certain remote areas of Asia . It was endemic to certain parts of Asia and was endemic in certain areas of the world .
 At times environmental factors or simple mutation can promote a dramatic rise in the numbers of the rodent fleas which are the plague’s usual carriers .
 Facilities for transport and travel can then promote widespread personto-person infection and turn an isolated outbreak of bubonic plague into an epidemic and ultimately a pandemic without the intervention of rat or flea .
 The ‘Black Death’ of the 14th-century was not the first visitation of plague to the Middle East or to Europe . The plague was the first to arrive in Europe and the Middle Eastern region .
 Byzantine historian Procopius gave a chillingly precise account of the symptoms and progress of the disease . The disease struck the Persian and Byzantine empires in the 540s and 540s .
 The second plague of the plague reached East Asia in the early 1330s and West Asia less than a decade later . The second scourge of plague was the second plague to reach East Asia, West Asia and East Asia .
 A run of rainy years and poor harvests in much of mid-1340s Europe had lowered resistance and led to the widespread consumption of suspect food supplies . The 1340s was a period of low resistance in Europe .
 Typically the plague was at its most virulent in congested urban areas . Dedicated professionals such as doctors and priests suffered disproportionately .
 While much plague history is anecdotal and local, such details can be just as telling as the massive mortality estimates . The plague is believed to have killed more than 100,000 people in the past year .
 Pestilence halted work on the cathedral of Siena in Italy, and the building is still truncated today . The cathedral is now truncated in the Italian city, and remains truncated .
 Tusmore in Oxfordshire was wiped out in 1348 and never restored . The population of Tusmore, Oxfordshire, never recovered from the 1348 plague .
 The 14th century pandemic of the Black Death can only be the subject of conjecture . Whether or to what extent the pandemic changed the course of world history is conjecture .
 The Yuan were ousted in 1368 in favour of the indigenous Chinese dynasty, the Ming . The Yuan dynasty was ruled by the Ming dynasty from 1368 onwards .
 West Asia saw a dramatic reduction in the population of its big Islamic cities and a reversion to nomadism outside them . West Asia certainly saw a drastic reduction of the population in the past .
 No western European states or societies collapsed in the wake of the plague . However, no western European countries collapsed after the plague did .
 Venice experienced short-lived administrative dislocation and then recovered . Great cities like Venice experienced a similar dislocation, but recovered . Venice has a long history of administrative problems .
 Social tensions were exacerbated as surviving craftsmen, labourers and servants now had the advantage of scarcity and might resist the demands of lords, masters or officialdom . Surviving craftsmen and labourers were now able to resist their demands .
 There was an increase in the Mediterranean slave trade as one solution to the labour shortage . The slave trade was one of the reasons for the shortage of labourers .
 Thousands of settlements in agricultural western Europe were abandoned in the two centuries that followed the population peak of the early 14th century . The population peaked in the early 15th century, leaving thousands of settlements across Europe .
 Few of these ‘lost villages’ were specifically eliminated by the plague or its accompanying panic . Survivors from the fens and moorlands of the agricultural margins could move (with the encouragement of landowners who needed their labour)
 Survivors coped with the paperwork of mortality, probate and the ricocheting finances of societies which had lost, on average, a third of their taxpayers . Survivors dutifully buried their dead and coped to the paperwork .
 14th century had none of the universal expectation of population growth and longevity which characterizes the modern era . The 14th Century had no expectation of a population growth or longevity .
 Life expectancy was less than half that of today and even those who survived the plague years had a very limited chance of reaching 70 . Life expectancy in plague years was very much lower than today and people who survived plague had a limited chance at 70 .
 Eyewitness accounts of plague years describe a society whose preachers used memento mori as a watchword . Preachers regularly portrayed earthly existence as a vale of tears . The plague years were known as the plague years .
 Western culture personified death as a figure in popular stories and morality plays . Meanwhile, mainstream Western culture took refuge in the incorporation of mortality into art and personified it .
 Modern communicators still draw on this plague-time imagery of mortality to convey an apocalyptic warning . Modern communicator still uses this imagery to convey apocalyptic warning.
 Crimean port of Kaffa was an important flashpoint for the transmission of the plague to Anatolia, the Levant and Europe . The Crimean port was a flashpoint in the spread of the deadly plague to the region .
 Kaffa was a Genoese trading base which in 1347 was attacked by the Kipchak Turks . In 1347 the plague was raging in the ranks of the Turks, in whose ranks were raging .
 Genoa's commercial rivals Pisa and Venice succumbed shortly afterwards, and the pestilence went on to devastate most of Europe . It had reached Scandinavia via the Hanseatic seaways by 1350, reaching Scandinavia .
 Black Death of 1347-52 generated economic, social and political change . Constant warfare reshaped the boundaries of kingdoms and other political entities . Loss of over a third of the population as a result of the Black Death generated economic and social change .
 Papal schism let loose challenges to the old order of Latin Christendom . It was also a period of crisis in the Church, as papal .
 In the wake of the Black Death there was an outbreak of popular revolts across Europe . Union al Krswo 13SS/A Wain papula rctafon 1 1 .
 The sudden, dramatic fall in the population resulted in the contraction of the labour force and a rise in wages . The sudden population drop was due to a fall in wages and a contraction in labour force .
 While living standards improved, there was an increase in the incidence of warfare leading to higher taxation and social unrest . However, while living standards increased, there were also higher taxes and higher taxes .
 The resulting war, an intermittent series of conflicts, was as much a French civil war as an Anglo-French contest . The resulting conflict is as much of a French Civil War as a British civil war .
 By 1453 the English had been expelled from all of France except Calais, and the Valois were in the process of achieving effective authority in France . The English were expelled from France by 1453 .
 The resulting Hundred Years War gave rise to a network of alliances linking the Valois to Scotland and Castile, the Plantagenets to Portugal and the Wittelsbach and Luxembourg dynasties of the Holy Roman Empire .
 Burgundy brought together the territorial principalities of the Low Countries first, in the 1360s, as a Valois satellite, then as a Plantagenet ally, and finally as a Habsburg inheritance . They also stimulated the emergence of a more powerful Burgundy which brought together
 The Hundred Years War network of alliances figured significantly in the warfare in the Iberian Peninsula which resulted in the establishment of the Trastamara dynasty in Castile and the Aviz dynasty in Portugal in 1385 .
 Italy developed as an essentially self-contained political complex, with Milan, Venice and Florence expanding into regional territorial states by the mid-15th century . Milan, Florence and Florence expanded into regional territories by the 15th century, becoming a regional state .
 Alfonso V of Aragon added the kingdom of Naples to his existing possession of Sicily in 1442, after conflict with a Valois claimant . In the south, the Trastamaran Alfonso . V of the . Aragon . added the . kingdom to his . existing possession
 Naples along with Milan, Venice, Florence and the Papacy sought intermittently after 1455 to function as a league to secure ‘the concert of Italy” from outside intervention . In the meantime, Naples, Venice and Florence sought to secure "the concert" of Italy .
 Germany and the Holy Roman Empire came to function as a network of princely and urban local regimes after the 1340s . Germany was less affected by large-scale warfare than other areas, with relatively few moments of widespread disruption after 1340 .
 The institution of elective kingship proved largely cohesive and peaceful . Imperial title passed in virtually hereditary succession from the House of Luxembourg to the Habsburgs in 1438 .
 In east central Europe the position of the Luxembourgs and Habsburgs as rulers of Bohemia and Hungary was intermittently challenged by the rise of the Lithuanian Jagiellon dynasty . In east . central Europe .
 In the Baltic, attempts to unite the three kingships of Denmark, Norway and Sweden were briefly successful with the creation in 1397 of the Union of Kalmar . Attempts to unify the Danish, Norwegian and Swedish kingships briefly succeeded in the 1397 attempt .
 From 1448 the Oldenburg dynasty maintained its control in Denmark and most of the western Norse world from Norway to Iceland . Nonetheless, from 1448 to 1448 they maintained control of Denmark .
 Latin Christendom, the Muslim Ottoman Empire and the Orthodox Christian Russian Empire emerged . The Muslim and Orthodox Christian empires emerged from Latin Christendsom .
 In 1309 the French Pope Clement V had taken up residence in Avignon . In 139, he had moved to Avignan to become the Pope .
 Parts of Europe were marked by dissent from established theological doctrine and by anticlerical criticism . This remained the situation until 1417, when the General Council at Constance secured the election of Pope Martin V .
 In England the Lollards, influenced by John Wycliffe, made no effective headway . The Lollards were influenced by Wycliffe and died in 17th century .
 Part 2 developed into a revolutionary challenge to the established order . Part 2 of Part 2 is a revolution against the establishment order . PART 2 is the first part of a revolution in the world's history .
 In 1415 IIus was burned at the stake lor heresy, an event that provoked the Hussite Wars against the Holy Roman Emperor . IIus burned at stake in 1415 provoked a series of bloody wars against the Emperor .
 Hussites achieved dramatic military victories in the 1420s, but their theological and political impact was contained alter peace was agreed in 1434-36 . Peace was agreed with the Hussites in 1433-36 after a series of military victories .
 Reformist clergy seeking to use church councils to reduce the authority of the Pope . Papacy was trying to reassert the pre-1378 order of church government .
 The Conciliarists eventually had to acknowledge defeat in 1449 . The preference of lay rulers for a monarchical papal ideology proved decisive .
 The levy of war taxation, often the trigger of such unrest, was of fundamental importance in the development of representative institutions . Parliaments or “Estates” became the vehicle for a heightened sense of the political community throughout Europe .
 It lasted for almost 40 years because lay political groups exploited the situation . Lay political groups aligned themselves behind rival claimants to papal office . The papal papal succession lasted for nearly 40 years .
 Valois France and its allies in Scotland and Castile recognized the Pope resident in Avignon, while England and Portugal as well as most parts of the Holy Roman Empire and northern and eastern Europe recognized the pope in Rome .
 Between 1370 and 1500 the rural world was marked by depressed grain prices, partly offset by increasing diversification from arable into pasture farming and horticulture .
 With the contraction of the labour force, wages rose and sustained the demand for a wide range of manufactured and other commodities, both staples and luxuries . The labour force has been contractioning in recent years .
 These may have housed members of the elite, or been craft and redistribution centres, or communal religious centres occupied only on ceremonial occasions .
 Trade was well developed, linking the early pueblo peoples with the north, the Pacific coast and Mesoamerica . From where they obtained copper bells and live scarlet macaws prized for their feathers, they obtained live scarlets macaws .
 In exchange they provided the Mexicans with turquoise mined in the region immediately to the south of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains . In exchange, the Mexicans provided the Mexican government with gold .
 N orth America in the 6th century was home to many different cultural traditions . The 6th-century America was known as America .
 Farming communities, growing native or introduced crops, were established in some parts of the south . Farming communities grew in some areas .
 Elsewhere, richly diverse ways of life were based on natural resources . Elsewhere in the world, people used to live off natural resources such as water .
 These communities also began to make pottery to supplement their traditional basket containers .
 Plazas, mounds and ballcourts reminiscent of those of Mesoamerica appeared in the Hohokam area by 600 . These public spaces were probably the focus of ceremonial and ritual activities .
 Smaller villages clustered around the main centres, which are thought to have been the homes of chiefs controlling the networks of irrigation canals that made two annual crops possible in this arid region . Smaller village centres thought to be the homes .
 Irrigation was also vitally important to the Anasazi and Mogollon peoples in the similarly arid areas to the north and east of Hohokam .
 G Iqc.00 • Sate Htuentuy • tiom Hill (giltyrf -togaflon ctfUrui rep/n c, 1300 fipbta urea after 13 W iuFto at peaptec.com .
 Spanish pueblos became larger and more elaborate complexes of adjoining rooms by the Spanish in the 16th century . These developed into larger and larger complexes of rooms, known as 'pueblos'
 Further north the pueblos of the Mesa Verde region had developed along different architectural lines . The puebloos had different architectural styles of their architecture .
 By 1150 most were constructed on natural or artificial platforms on the face of canyon cliffs, such as Cliff Palace . At first situated on plateaus, by 1150 they were situated on cliffs . Cliff Palace is one of the most famous in the world .
 These cliff-side villages, many dominated by watch towers, were probably designed for defence and reflect deteriorating environmental conditions at the time . Many of the villages were likely to have been built for defence .
 It grew into a town and became a trade and craft production centre . It was surrounded by a network of roads and forts, controlling the turquoise sources .
 Mexican architecture now appeared and sophisticated irrigation systems were constructed . Modern irrigation systems now appeared .
 In other areas favourable climatic and environmental conditions had promoted the spread of farming into marginal regions in preceding centuries . Conditions were deteriorating by the later 13th century .
 There was widespread drought and many sites were abandoned, their inhabitants moving into more fertile areas, particularly along the banks of rivers . The population of many sites was abandoned, many of them moving to fertile areas .
 Apache and Navajo hunters began to make raids on the fringes of the area in the 1450s . In 1528 a Spanish expedition signalled future domination by Europeans .
 Many were autonomous small chiefdoms but a hierarchy developed in some areas . Subsequent chiefdoms were answerable to a centralized authority operating from a major centre .
 Gahokia, a powerful and prosperous centre 1050-1250, housed perhaps 30,000 people in dwellings clustered around the palisaded centre with its plaza and huge mounds . The largest town in this emerging mosaic of Mississippian chiefdoms was Gahokahokia .
 Although hunting continued to be important, the increased reliance on agriculture encouraged settlement in semi-permanent villages . The population grew in the early 20th century, with hunting still an important factor .
 By the time the Europeans arrived in North America in the 16th century, the northeast was a patchwork of nations settled in small territories . The northeast was constantly at war but also trading with one another .
 Some settled differences, uniting into the Iroquois Confederacy which became involved in the wars between rival European powers in the region . Later some settled their differences and became involved with the wars against European powers .
 The Great Plains had been home for thousands of years to small groups of buffalo hunters and small-scale horticulturalists . It's been home to buffalo hunters, horticultureists and buffalo hunters .
 The introduction of the bow and arrow may have increased hunting efficiency and, possibly for this reason, several peoples moved onto the Great Plains from the surrounding areas . It may have been possible that people moved from surrounding areas to Great Plains .
 After about 900, colonists from the Mississippian cultures brought maize cultivation to the Missouri region of the Great Plains .
 The stockades and moats surrounding their settlements, along with evidence of massacres and scalpings, indicate that these groups were constantly at war . Evidence of massacres, scalpings and scalings are also found in the evidence .
 Further west, in the Great Basin, hunter-gatherer groups continued their long-standing nomadic way of life until it was destroyed by white settlers .
 Mtssittippian lawns were ceremonial centres br their surroundi ng communities, participating in the religious irodrtion known as the 'Southern Cdr. This time in religious i rodrtion, the Southern Cdr.'
 Symbolic artefacts characteristic of this cull included toppef pendents, seoshelFs and figurines bearing distinctive designs . The cull area was located in the Mississippkm area .
 Mounds in the heart af these centres were crowned by temples and sometimes the houses af the elite . Mounds were crowned with temples and houses of the elite.
 Around 1450 Apache and Navajo from the far northwest reached the area and took up horse-breeding and hunting on the western Great Plains . The Pacific coast enabled communities to live in villages all year round .
 Shells were used by some groups as a medium of exchange, and slave-raiding was also widespread . Shells used by groups were also used as mediums of exchange .
 Expert woodearvers fashioned totem poles and extravagantly decorated houses and artefacts . Expert wood-earvers, these coastal groups fashioned totem pole poles and extravagant houses .
 The rulers established their authority over the peoples they conquered by relocating large numbers, either sending them to work temporarily at nearby way-stations, or moving them permanently to more distant provinces .
 Provincial heirs to power were educated in Cuzco and brought provincial cult objects to the capital . They also ensured that provincial heir to power was educated in the city .
 In the provinces sacred mountains such as Cerro El Plomo in Chile became the sites of state-dedicated child sacrifices . Oracular centres and ruined cities were appropriated for Inca ceremonies .
 Decorated with inlaid pigments, it represents the trophy head of an Anti, an uncivilized enemy from the Antisuyu tropical forest ""quarter"" of the empire . The Anti is a trophy head for the empire and represents the Anti, a uncivil
 Made by Inca descendants in colonial period and influenced by European art . It juxtaposes pre-Hispanic characters and activities with the abstract motifs of traditional Inca art .
 Four avenues emanating from the centre of the city were linked to the empire's road system . They led to the symbolic four ""quarters"" of the empire . The avenues were linked with the Empire's roads system and led to four "quarters"
 Two of these avenues also divided the city into ritually complementary northwest and southeast halves, Hanan and Hurin . Hanan is Hanan, Hurin, and the other two are Hanan .
 The stone walls of Cuzco later served as the bases for Spanish colonial buildings .
 The Incas had broader control over their subjects and directed projects in distant territories . The Aztecs undertook most of their building and manufacturing projects in the imperial core .
 In Tenochtitlan the Aztecs created a remarkable assembly of large, finely carved stone sculptures in a mere 70-vear period before the fall of their empire to the Spanish in 1521 .
 In comparison, distinctive Inca architecture, ceramics and other remains have been found throughout their empire . The Inca empire was the largest in pre-Spanish America .
 The Inca Empire recorded history in manuscripts with hieroglyphic dates and pictographic representations of rulers and their activities . Ancient Andesans used knotted strings for recordkeeping .
 The reconstruction of the history of the Inca Empire is therefore problematic . The reconstruction has been problematic for many of the world's most famous explorers .
 The Incas were great builders, and the extent of their empire is still visible in their road system . They built an advanced road system of highland and lowland routes along which armies and caravans of llamas moved .
 At intervals there were settlements or wavstations built of distinctive Inca stonework, such as the well-studied site of Huanuco Pampa . At intervals of Inca settlements, there was also a settlement or settlement .
 These architectural complexes included accommodation for local artisans and labourers working for the state, feasting halls and ceremonial plazas for the wooing of the local elite, and lodgings .
 All aspects of production, from the acquisition of materials to the manufacture and distribution of finished items, were controlled by the state . The state controlled all aspects of the production, including the acquisition and manufacture of materials and distribution .
 The Inca capital of Cuzco was the political, cultural and ritual focal point of the Inca empire . It was the center of the empire .
 It was surrounded by settlements of Inca commoners and members of the elite and their retainers, relocated from sometimes distant areas of the empire . The Inca empire was also surrounded by Inca commoners and members of the elite .
 Cuzco proper was relatively small, containing only the residences of the living ruler and royal clans reputedly descended from previous kings . The temples, plazas, platforms, platforms and halls for imperial ritual were used in imperial ritual .
 Palaces and temples consisted of rows of simple adobe or stone rooms with gabled straw roofs . Where they differed from homes of commoners was in the quality of workmanship and materials such as finely worked ashlar masonry, gold and silver sheets attached to walls .
 Because the Aztecs kept written records, we have a better idea of their imperial history . The Aztec empire was one of the first to have written records .
 The Aztec empire was founded in 1431 after the Aztec war of independence from the Tepanecs . It was founded after the war between Aztec and Tepaecs, who had previously dominated the Valley of Mexico .
 It was formed by an alliance of three cities Texcoco, Tlacopan and Tenochtitlan . The last of which quickly became the dominant city . It is the largest city in Mexico .
 KINGDOMS -— PrtNintid boufxfar> ® Flnmtiri ctjprtol I Independent paliFy Q tetany siha • {Ipta temple site • (Aflya city • PprL^frade under i
 Early expansion by Montezuma I and two other kings consolidated the highlands on all sides of the capital . Later thrusts by Ahuitzotl and Montezum II went into tropical coastal areas and temperate highlands to south and east .
 At the time of the Spanish arrival in 1519, Aztec armies were reportedly poised to invade the northern Maya kingdoms on the Yucatan Peninsula from the port .
 The structure of the Aztec Empire extended from the Pacific to the Gulf coast . Imperial provinces were bordered by blocks of unconquered territories, keeping the people of Mesoamerica in constant state of warfare .
 The region had well-developed market and long-distance trading systems centuries before the rise of the Aztecs, who tried to control these where they could .
 The Aztecs did not put their energies into administrative structures . Their empire lacked the monumental road system of the Incas' polity .
 Aztec artisans were accomplished stone carvers, as evidenced by surviving temples at mountain sites like Malinalco to the southwest of the capital . However, Aztec artists were accomplished carvers .
 After conquest of a province, numerous captives of war were brought to the capital for sacrifice . Many captives were taken to the city for sacrifice.
 As in Peru, captured deity images were put in Aztec temples . Sacred mountain sites were appropriated for ceremonies and temples, and tribute was demanded .
 Loyal subjects from Tenochtitlan and nearby areas were sent to colonies . Loyal subjects sent to strategically located colonies . The foreign elite and traders spent time in the cities of the imperial centre .
 At its height Tenochtitlan had a population of perhaps 200,000, four times that of its nearest rival . At the height of its heyenights, the city was four times the size of Mexico's main rival .
 According to contemporary descriptions, it had a huge central precinct in which four great causeways met . It was described as having a central precinct of four causeways . According to the contemporary descriptions of it, it was described by contemporary descriptions .
 The precinct contained many temples and was immediately surrounded by the palaces of rulers and the elite . The precinct was surrounded by palaces, temples and temples .
 Commoners' enclosed compounds and house gardens were organized in a grid of streets and canals . Beyond were the neighbourhoods of commoners, where enclosed compounds, house gardens and house .
 Texcoco and Tlacopan, along with numerous other towns as old as or older than Tenochtitlan, remained uneasy allies and potential enemies of the capital .
 The Spanish arrived in 1519 they found thousands of Indian allies both in the valley and throughout the empire ready to revolt against the Aztecs . Thus when the Spanish arrived they found .
 There were substantial unconquered areas next to and surrounded by imperial provinces . The area was largely uninhabited .
 The empire's capital, Tenochtitlan, and its two uneasy allies Tlacopan and Texcoco were three of some 50 cities with surrounding territories and satellite towns in the Valley of Mexico .
 Codex Mendoza includes pictures of the pre-Conquest tributes that were demanded from individual provinces among them warriors' clothing, bags of feathers and dried chillies . Among them are pictures of tributes demanded from provinces .
 The export of both products from China continued to flourish throughout the 16lh, 17lh and lBlh centuries . Chinese merchants did not themselv&s venture outside Asia .
 In 1700 they still covered vast areas, but in the following century the three Muslim empires the Mughal, Solovki and Ottoman decKned as the commercial and military power of the Europeans expanded .
 Portuguese explorers set out to find a sea route to the East in the 15th century . Exploring the west coast of Africa led to a series of Portuguese voyages down the east coast of the world .
 The Gape of (Jood 11 ope was fi 11 al 1 y reaeIxud in 1488, just fou r years before Christopher Columbus set sail across the Atlantic . Discovery of the West Indies was quickly followed by Spanish expeditions to the American mainland and the creation
 New trade routes across the Atlantic and Indian oceans pioneered by the Spanish and Portuguese . Dutch, English and French took over in the 17th century by the Dutch and English .
 Africa was both a survivor and a victim of this transoceanic transport revolution* The economies of its states and the extensive trade network linking the north* east and west of the continent were little affected by contact with Europeans* However, from 1450 over 12 million Africans were forced to
 The Europeans were to have a greater effect on the economies of Asia . Europe was to have an effect on Asia's economies in the 1950s .
 In 1600 and 1602 the English and Dutch East India Companies were created . Within a few years the Dutch company had weakened Portuguese power in the Indian Ocean .
 Local politics and rivalries between Hindu and Muslim entrepreneurs and courtier-traders continued to influence the patterns of European commerce .
 In the first half of the 17th century a struggle between Crown and Parliament in England, and a war of liberation in the Netherlands (from which the independent Dutch Republic emerged), placed merchant capitalists in both countries in more powerful positions .
 A century later trade outside Europe accounted for 20 to 25 per cent of the Dutch Republic’s total trade, while the figure for England was as high as 50 per cent . The Dutch Republic's total trade outside of Europe was 20 per cent in the 1920s .
 The technological superiority of India and China was not matched by an urge towards overseas expansion and conquest . However, the technology superiority of the two countries did not match that urge for overseas expansion .
 Under the Ming dynasty Chinese voyages of exploration in the early 15th century had reached as far as the east coast of Africa . The Ming dynasty had reached out to the East Coast of Africa under the reigns of Ming .
 China's voyages helped to consolidate China’s sphere of influence in Asia . But they did not lead to the creation of a far-reaching overseas trading network .
 Trade with the rest of Asia and with Europe continued to flourish with the aid of overland routes, short-distance sea routes and foreign merchants . The outflow of ceramics and silk, and an inflow of silver, led to the decline of silver .
 China relied on intensive agriculture to support its ever-growing population . But in the 16th century it was stricken by harvest failures, droughts and famine, which in turn led to frequent rebellions .
 In 1644 the Ming dynasty gave way to Manchu conquerors from the north . Insufficient resources were devoted to defence, and in 1644 Manchu were defeated .
 In India the Mughal Empire established in 1526 by Muslim warrior descendants of the Mongols was centred on cities in the country’s heartland .
 Its rulers financed their administration, and the architectural achievements for which they are renowned, by taxing local agriculture and commerce .
 Muslims had little interest in overseas trade beyond the existing involvement of the artisanal industries in the Muslim trading networks that stretched from Arabia to Indonesia .
 The Portuguese used their ships’ guns to overcome opposition and established trading posts around the coast . The Portuguese were intent on seizing control of these networks .
 The Mughal Empire was just one of three powerful Muslim empires in the 16th century . The empire was one of the three powerful Islamic empires in that era .
 After capture of Constantinople in 1453, Ottoman Turks had embarked on a process of territorial expansion in Africa, Asia and Europe . Another was that of the Ottoman Turks, who captured the city of Constantinople from 1453 in 1454 .
 This was to continue until 1683 when their last major expedition was driven back from Vienna, the Austrian Ilahshurg capital . This was the first major expedition to return to Vienna .
 Among the other great powers with which the Ottomans came into conflict in the 16th century was the third representative of the political and cultural achievements of Islam at this time the Safavid Empire in Iran .
 Despite a resounding Ottoman victory in 1514, it was not until 1639 that the border between the two empires was established . The present-day frontier between Iran and Iraq was the first frontier established .
 Akbcr was responsible far the considerable expansion af the Mughal Empire's territory and for creating a centralised and efficient administration . Ruling between 1556 and 160S, he was responsible for much of the expansion of the empire .
 During the Mughal period the Europeans established trading posts around the coast . Europeans established trade posts around coast .
 They brought gold and silver from the Americas, and so in the short term they stimulated the Indian economy . They brought it to India, but it was not long enough to stimulate the economy .
 In the 18th century their activities were to contribute to the decline of the Mughals and the beginning of British rale in India .
 T Hie shahs of the Safavid Empire were great patrons af architecture and art of which this picture made up of tiles b a fine example .
 After his death the empire went into decline and finally collapsed in 1736 . The empire finally collapsed after the death of Napoleon III .
 It heralded o raw capacity for observation of the natural world which eventually surpassed even that of the Chinese . It also heralded the rise of China's ability to observe nature .
 The sophisticated depiction of spatial relationships which evolved in art is exemplified in Jha Artist's Studio by The Dutch painter Jon Vermeer . Jha artist's Studio is a masterpiece of art by Vermeers .
 The conflict with the Safavids temporarily diverted Ottoman attention away from Europe . The power with which it most frequently came into direct confrontation in the 16th and 17th centuries was the Habsburg .
 In the 1520s this empire was little more than the largest conglomeration of territories and rights in Europe . Spain, Austria, Hungary and the former lands of the Duchy of Burgundy since the 9th century .
 The lahshurgs began the reconquest of 1 iungartan territory lost to the Ottomans in 1618-48 . They became the major dynastic power of central Europe .
 To the northeast of the Habsburg Empire lay Poland a kingdom which through much of the 17th and 18th centuries was in conflict with Russia . Poland was in the midst of a war with Russia in the early 18th and 17th century .
 Russia began a process of exploration and expansion on land comparable with that undertaken overseas by the western European maritime powers . Under Muscovy's Grand Duke Ivan III, Russia began to expand on land .
 By the end of the 18th century its empire stretched from the Baltic to the Pacific Ocean* and formed a world economy in miniature . Its empire stretched to the Baltic and the Pacific, forming a world of miniature .
 John While had painted this view of a Native American village in the 1580s . In 1607 an English colony was established in Virginia, where John While painted the scene .
 Further north the colony of Plymouth was established in 1620 by the Pilgrim Fathers, a Puritan group who had broken away from the Church af England . The colony was established by the Puritan Fathers, who had split from England .
 The European discovery of the Americas ensured the gradual integration of the New World into the emerging European world economy . Many such separatist groups were la settle in North America .
 The Spanish conquest of Central and South America was accompanied by the decimation of the native Indian population . The estimated pre-conquest population of about 57 million was reduced to less than six million by the late 16th century .
 slavery was introduced by the Spanish conquistadores and their successors . A similar fate awaited the smaller North American population when European colonists began to arrive in the 17th century .
 Between 1500 and 1650 about 500,000 African slaves were imported by the Spanish and Portuguese . Between 1500 to 1650 between 15 and 50,000 slaves were brought in from Africa .
 The slave system was extended to the Dutch, English and French colonies . Far greater numbers were subsequently imported when the slave system expanded .
 In the short term the Europeans' discovery of the New World drained resources away from Spain and Portugal, who pursued their expansionist strategies through conquest .
 Expansion in the Americas did not become profitable for the European powers until the later 17th century . A thriving colonial economy began to develop, based on the plantation crops of sugar in the West Indies, tobacco, rice and indigo .
 British -fofiuguguese -Outth -Bfllw Spoiish *— Msftnvmai — faith < Al she beginning of the I6lh century European trading routes did net reach beyond West Africa .
 By ihe end of the 18lb century it had crossed the Allnnfic, Pacific and Indian ocean . Inextricably linking Europe, Asia and the Americas in the growing exchange of row materials .
 Profits from trade with the colonies at first went to the Dutch Republic, followed closely by England and then France . Profits of trade with colonies went mainly to the Netherlands, followed by England .
 The domination of the evolving global economy by Europe, rather than by China or the Islamie powers, was due to a number of convergent forces, including the development of maritime enterprise and scientific and technological innovations .
 The division of the Church during the 16th-oemury Reformation, between Catholic and Protestant believers, encouraged emigration to the New World .
 The existence of a competitive state system in Europe secured European hegemony . The willingness and capacity of European governments to mobilize military and naval power in support of trade secured Europe hegemony .
 European appetite for colonial and Asian goods was to play a significant role in industrialization of western Europe . Tea, sugar, tobacco, spices, and silks as well as luxury items produced within Europe, were important to industrialization .
 The spread of consumerism and the desire for market-bought products encouraged rural households to specialize in both food production and cottage industry in order to enhance their purchasing power . An early “industrious revolution"" operating at the level of the household economy took place .
 Commercial revolution provided new overseas markets for manufactured goods, especially in North America after around 1750, as well as essential raw materials .
 War industries such as shipbuilding, armaments and metal-smelting saw major technological improvements in the 18th century . The struggle to protect erseas markets and colonial sources of supply stimulated war industries .
 The expansion of the Europecentred world economy paved the way for the Industrial Revolution which was to take place first in Britain, and then in Europe and the United States, with enormous repercussions .
 Magellan's voyage oaois the Pacific in 1:520—21 began with the perilous journey around Cape Horn, through the straits now bear his name .
 Zheng He’s pioneering voyages of 1405-33 in the Pacific and Indian oceans . However, the insularity of the Chinese court in the late 15th century led to the destruction of most of the official records of his voyages .
 The discoveries by European explorers were new and momentous in the sense that expanding geographical horizons were matched by new mental horizons . The discovery of the continent in Europe was momentous .
 The geographical discoveries of the late 15th century were neither isolated nor accidental historical events . The geographical discovery of the 15th Century was not isolated or accidental events .
 They were part of a European expansionist phase, and were to some degree a response to the disruption of Eurasian commerce brought about by plague and the closure of the Silk Road and the caravan routes . The fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 was part of the European expansion
 The need to find a direct route to the Far East, principally for trading silks and spices, provided a powerful impetus to exploration .
 In 1445 the westernmost tip of the continent was rounded, and by 1460 they had travelled 3,200 kilometres (2,000 miles) south as far as Sierra Leone . They had brought back spices, gold and slaves .
 By 1474 the equator had been crossed, and in 1488 Bartholomew Dias reached the Cape of Good Hope . This was an important step towards the establishment of a sea route to India, which was achieved by Vasco da Gama in 1497-98 . Vas
 Mapmakers were able to show the sea encompassing southern Africa, but the globe was still envisaged as a much smaller and younger planet than is actually the case . The globe was thought to be dominated by the Eurasian landmass .
 Christopher Columbus set sail across the Atlantic in 1492 . He was guided by the assertion of Ptolemy that the circumference of the Earth is 11,000 kilometres shorter than it actually is .
 His belief that the West Indies were islands off the coast of China was quickly discredited . Further Spanish expeditions began to explore the Americas and, beyond them, the Pacific .
 Portuguese explorers searched for a passage to the East by a southeasterly route . Spanish explorers searched in a westerly and southwesterly direction . The Spanish and the Portuguese searched for the New World in the same direction .
 Christopher Columbus discovered the West Indies and the Venezuelan coast between 1492 and 1502 . The result of the search was the discovery of the Caribbean by Christopher Columbus . Christopher Columbus was the first explorer to discover the island .
 Columbus, as his Spanish patrons realized, had greatly underestimated the distances involved in reaching Asia by a southwesterly route, but he nevertheless pressed on . Columbus, who arrived in Spain in 17th century, reached Asia by the end of the year .
 The New World was Spain’s unexpected prize, confirmed in the Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494 . It was described by Amerigo Vespucci in travel accounts published from 1507 .
 By the 1520s the Old World recognized the Americas as an enormous ‘new’ continent between Europe and Asia . The Americas was recognized as a “new” continent by the 15th century .
 Spanish exploitation of the Caribbean islands began with the settlement of Hispaniola in 1493, followed by that of Cuba and Puerto Rico . Hispaniola was the first settlement of the island in 1494 . Puerto Rico and Cuba were the first to be settled on Hispaniola .
 These islands provided a base for the exploration of Central America . The failure of the Spanish to find a sea route to Asia encouraged further colonization and plunder .
 In 1527 Saavedra travelled across the Pacific from the coast of Mexico to the Moluccas . The conquest of Mexico and Peru provided opportunities for transpacific exploration .
 A viable return route, from the Philippines to Acapulco, was first navigated by Urdaneta in 1565 and was followed thereafter by Spanish galleons .
 In 1567 Mendana and Sarmiento led an expedition in search of a great southern continent and found the Solomon Islands . Mendana led the expedition to find the island .
 Mendana attempted to return there to establish a Christian colony in 1595 . Mendana was accompanied by the Portuguese navigator Quiros. He attempted to set up a colony in the area .
 They were unable to find the Solomons but instead stumbled on the Marquesas and Santa Cruz islands . They were able to find them on their way to the Solomsons .
 The full extent of the Pacific, from Alaska to New Zealand and the east coast of Australia, was to be explored . However, it was not until the more scientific voyages of the 18th century that the full extent was explored by scientists .
 The Spanish and Portuguese attempted to exclude northern Europeans from their expanding colonial empires and the new sea routes across the southern hemisphere . The English, French and Dutch in North America were first to arrive in the Americas in the 16th century .
 The opening up of the north Atlantic world was mainly an English, French and Dutch enterprise . As a result, it was more than a by-product of the quest for a northwestern route to the East .
 Bristol merchants involved in trade with Iceland began trading with Iceland in 1420s . The first initiatives were probably undertaken as early as the 14th century . Bristol merchants were involved in the trade between the two countries .
 These traders were certainly exploring the coast of Newfoundland in 1481, some time before John Cabot made his historic voyage of 1497 .
 In 1510 the English knew more about North America than any other European country did, but during the next half century the French moved into the lead . The English were the only European country to know more about the continent than the French .
 In 1524 Verrazano, in the service of France, sailed along the coast from Cape Fear to Newfoundland, thereby proving that the earlier discoveries of Columbus and Cabot were part of a single landmass .
 The first steps in exploring North America’s interior were taken ten years later by Jacques Cartier . Cartier travelled along the St Lawrence River as far as Montreal .
 Francis Drake circumnavigated the world in the search for a new transpacific route . The years 1577-80 also saw an important breakthrough in English efforts to find a new route .
 The northern maritime countries were fortunate to inherit the more sophisticated seamanship and navigational skills of the Portuguese and Spanish . The northern . maritime . countries were . fortunate to have inherited the more advanced seamanship .
 The art of celestial navigation, using the quadrant and astrolabe, was improved by the Portuguese during the 1480s . The first navigational manual, the Regimento, was published in 1509 .
 Sebastian Cabot helped spread knowledge of Spanish navigational techniques in England . Cabot was an expert cartographer who helped spread the knowledge of navigation techniques .
 Improvements in ship design were not, of themselves, sufficient to stimulate long-distance exploration which took place during the 16th century .
 The Dutch introduced top masts and sails, as well as the fluytschip . These advances facilitated commercial exploitation and colonization of the Americas .
 The idea of European settlement in the Americas in order to exploit fully the land’s natural resources was surprisingly slow to win acceptance and, when it did, it was invariably difficult to sustain .
 Portuguese seoborne empire was hosed on a series of forts linking together fradirrg entrepots from the coast of Africa to South and Southeast Asia, and on la China and Japan . L>‘ tdfHQwtf' miippi™ £ lilacs
 This system secured Portuguese It ode with the Eost for nearly o century . It secured Portuguese Ode with Eost .
 Portuguese were to lose most of their eastern possessions Id the Dutch in the 17th century . They managed to hold on to Goa f surviving Dutch bJcwkades of the city in 1603 .
 European explorers had ventured into Asia in the 1st century ad, but significant European contact with the continent only began on 27 May 1498 . The Portuguese fleet of Vasco da Gama landed at i ’alicut on the west coast of India .
 Da Gama rounded the Gape oI Good Hope in search of the valuable spices and silks which had long reached Europe only via expensive overland routes . DaGama had rounded the Great Hope looking for valuable spices .
 Japan was reached in 1542 and a settlement established in China, at Macau, in 1555 . The motives of the Portuguese were both economic and religious .
 In the pursuit of wealth, they attempted to establish a monopoly over the spice trade to Europe . They attempted to force entry into an already extensive trading network within Asia .
 The Portuguese coerced local merchants into paying licence fees and seized the most lucrative trade routes for themselves . Previously, this commerce had been conducted by indigenous merchants along free-trade principles .
 Rivalry with Spain was intense and after the crowns of the two Iberian countries were united in 1580 internecine strife became hitter . Rivalries between Spain and Spain were intense .
 A further problem was caused by the revival of Asian empires, whose tempo ran' weaknesses had I teen exploited by the Portuguese . The Portuguese empire's tempo was also at risk of being exploited by Asian empires .
 Once the Tokugawa had achieved victory in the civil wars, they expelled the Iberians and in 1639 outlawed Christianity as a danger to the stability of their new state . In Japan, for example, in 1638 Christianity was outlawed in Japan .
 Portuguese influence was eclipsed by the rise of another European power . For the most part, however, Portuguese influence in Asia was limited .
 Following the establishment of their East India Company in 1602, the Dutch progressively displaced the Portuguese in Asian trade and developed their own trading empire further east . The success of the Dutch was based on superior mercantile and maritime skills .
 Protestants were less interested in making converts than their Catholic rivals . They were perceived as less of a threat by the indigenous societies .
 Following the expulsion of the Iberians from Japan, the Tokugawa invited the Dutch to conduct trade at Nagasaki .
 I Hitch maritime influence grew during the 17th century and remained strong east of Ceylon throughout the iNth century . The maritime influence of the Ceylon-era Ceylon coast continued east of the island .
 The Dutch were drawn into the politics of the hinterlands behind their port settlements . They spent scarce resources on local wars at great cost to their trade . One reason for this was that the Dutch spent much more on local politics .
 English merchants had initially tried to break into the spice trade of the Indonesian archipelago hut after the Massacre of Amboina in 1623, when Dutch forces destroyed their principal trading settlement, they were effectively excluded . However, the principal reason for their demise was the belated entry into
 India was originally regarded as of limited mercantile importance because its spices were thought to he of lower quality than those found elsewhere . India was once thought to be of limited importance because of its quality .
 Timor English gained secondary' access to markets from the Gulf to the China seas . The country gained secondary access to the Gulf and China markets .
 From 1650® onwards the cloth trade became the main source of European profits in Asia . There was also a growing demand in Europe for Indian textiles, and there was also growing demand for Indian cloths .
 The English used India as a staging post for ventures further east, forging a broad triangular trade with China . This, in turn, caught the attention of the French, whose first Asian settlement was established in India in l(rti4 T)
 From the second quarter of the 18th century trade relations between England, France and India began to change . Trade relations between the three countries began to be more open .
 Many European states put up tariff harriers against Indian textile imports in order to protect their own domestic industries . Many European countries put up tariffs against Indian textiles to protect domestic industry .
 This increased the importance to the English of trade with China and, in turn, placed greater emphasis on their ability to gain access to Indian silver and opium .
 In addition the Mughal Empire, which had previously confined European activities to the coasts, began to break up . In addition European activities began to be limited to the coast .
 Its successor states were soon at war with one another, making demands for finance and armaments . Europeans found it too lucrative to ignore . The Europeans found the lucrative armaments and finance demanded .
 Spanish Mlaniiafori were the four voyage in which Col umbers discovered the printipd Caribbean islan ds and expiated major sertwm .
 C olumbus discovered America in the name of Spain in 1492, but this famous voyage was merely the initial step in the Spanish colonization of a large part of the continent .
 Spanish attempts to exploit their new territories by establishing trading posts in the Caribbean were unsuccessful . The simple agrarian societies of the islands could not sustain a trading economy . However, Spanish attempts were unsuccessful because of the lack of trading posts .
 The Spanish established colonies of exploitation in Hispaniola, Cuba and Puerto ilico, using forced Indian labour in agriculture and goldmining . The economy was undermined by the collapse of the indigenous workforce, caused by Spanish mistreatment and the spread of European diseases .
 I n 151S I Icman < k>rt&> was sent by the governor of Cuba on a commercial and exploring expedition to the Yucatan Peninsula . Icman was sent to Cuba on commercial and . exploring expedition .
 Cortes repudiated the governor's mandate and henceforth acted on his own initiative . Cortes acknowledged only the authority of the King of Spain . Once ashore he repudiated his mandate, Cortes became a diplomat .
 Cortes and his Tlaxcalan allies entered the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, in 1519 . Cortes was forced to return to the coast to meet and win over to his side a hostile Spanish army dispatched from Cuba .
 Cortes' army retreated to Tlaxcalan and launched a successful campaign against Tenochtitlan in 1521 . Unfortunately the greed of the Spanish left behind had alienated the Aztecs .
 This victory brought under Spanish control of millions of central Mexicans who had formerly been Aztec tributaries . Spanish conquistador's victory in 16th century brought under control millions of Mexicans .
 Spanish colonies in Darien and on the Pacific coast of the Panama isthmus, first crossed by Balboa in 1513 . Meanwhile, from Hispaniola, the Spanish had organized colonies on the coast of Panama .
 Panama was used as a base for expeditions into Nicaragua and beyond . Panama was also used to be used to establish bases in Nicaragua and . beyond .
 Pi zona's conquest ol riie empire of the Inca* was ihe first sta^e of rite Spanish colonization of South America . The Inca empire was the first to conquer South America.
 Amalgro and all five Pizarro brothers were killed in these wars, and Peru was not brought under Spain s control until around 1560 .
 T Atahuolpa, Ihe Into ruler, was capiured by Francisco Pizarro offer being enticed la a meeting in the main square of Cajomorra . Tahuolpas was the ruler of the Spanish kingdom .
 His unarmed retinue was qukkly overcome and slaughtered by the Spanish artillery . The Spaniard was killed by the Spaniards in Spain .
 In the Spanish Caribbean colonies of Cuba, Santa Domingo and Puerto Rica, however, African slave labour was used to work the sugar and coffee plantations .
 In other regions there were less stratified, semi-sedentary and nomadic societies in which people produced little beyond their own consumption needs . In other areas, people were more likely to produce little beyond the consumption of themselves .
 Until around 1650 all American Indian societies suffered massive population kisses reducing the original totals by 90 per cent . What is certain is that until around . 1650 the population of American Indians was reduced by 90 percent .
 Once thought to be caused by Spanish brutality, now largely attributed to Indians' Lack of resistance to European and African diseases . Losses once thought to have been due to Spanish brutality .
 The Spanish introduced a system known as the encorrzienda, under which groups of American Indians were allotted to a Spanish overlord, or cnconvendero y . Under this they supplied labour and tribute and from whom they received protection .
 Indian communities were required to supply labour to private employers in three main activities; mining, agriculture and textiles . These were state-regulated labour systems .
 The Spanish set about producing commodities previously unknown to the Indians, principally wheat, cattle, sheep, wine and sugar . The Spanish industry also expanded as the Spanish began to produce commodities unknown to Indians .
 Economic development outside Mexico and Peru was slow or even non-ex is tent . Spanish continued to use the encojmvmtu system to appropriate the small surpluses of foodstuffs and cash erops .
 In the middle decades of the 1 7th century the decline in the number of Indians and in the international price of silver caused an economic recession in Spanish America .
 Recovery began around 1670 and in the 18th century there was rapid economic growth . In Mexico and Peru this was based on the revival of the silver export industry and the expansion of agriculture and textile manufacturing .
 Spanish employers advanced wages and credit to Indians and used the resulting debts, which the labourers could not repay, to bring them into the workforce . Expansion was driven by goldmining in Ecuador and Colombia and plantation production of sugar, coffee and indigo in Mexico, the Central American isth
 These areas were integrated into the mainstream economy in the 18th century .
 In Brazil, the Portuguese began by bartering tools and trinkets for Indian-supplied dye woods . However, the indigenous market for manufactures was soon saturated, and from e, 1 55 ij the colonists turned to sugar production .
 The sugar industry depended entirely upon foreign markets and dominated Brazils economic and social development until 1700 . It dominated Brazil's economic development .
 Early sugar plantations were worked by Indian labourers, most of them enslaved . Most of the early sugar plantations worked by slaves .
 Their productivity was low because they came from cultures with little experience of settled agriculture . Their numbers were reduced by exposure to European diseases, particularly during the 1550s and 1560s .
 By the early 17th century the colonists had substituted imported African slaves for slaves .
 The main impetus to Brazilian economic growth came from the opening up of gold and diamond mines in Minas Gerais and Goins, which were also worked by imported slaves .
 In the early colonial period the Spanish crown had little authority in America . The Spanish crown was in charge of the American colonies .
 Santo < In Ih* 18th century khe strudure of colonial gavernmtial in Spanish America wm. was reformed. Santo . Santo was a Spanish colonial leader of Spain .
 The friars, who came to the Americas to christianize the Indians iu the ""spiritual conquest”, deplored the Spanish mistreatment of the indigenous population . They largely ignored their chief critics, the friars . Most of whom deplored their treatment of the Indians
 Spanish crown feared coriquisradores who had conquered Mexico, Central and South America would form an autonomous and hereditary aristocracy . The Spanish crown began imposing its authority on its American acquisitions in 1550 .
 The government's main concern was to curb the colonists' virtually unlimited powers over the Indians . It whittled away the quantities of tribute and labour extracted by the encomcnduros and transferred numerous encomtendas .
 Spanish America was divided into viceroyalties, each subdivided into a small number of audiencias substantial areas administered by a legal council and a larger number of corregimientosrural districts with urban centres governed .
 From around 1640 Spain’s authority in the Americas weakened as important royal powers were commuted in exchange for fiscal payments . The practice of selling official posts to American-born Spaniards became widespread .
 These posts were used to benefit their holders, and their extended family networks, rather than to enhance royal authority . These posts are used to help the holder of the posts and their networks .
 Weak government led to a stagnation in Spain’s revenues from the New World and a decline in its capacity to defend itself . Weak government in Spain led to stagnation in revenues and decline in defense capacity, says historian .
 The Spanish crown attempted the bureaucratic reconquest of its American empire . This experience stimulated the li Bourbon Re forms’, a programme of economic and political reorganization through which the crown attempted to re-establish itself .
 The Spanish Empire in Korth America was vost, but (I ottroeied few Spanish seiibrs and ihere was virtually na eccmomtc development oulside Florkh .
 The Iberian monopoly was not accepted by the other European powers . Hundreds of voyages were dispatched from northern Europe in the 16th century . Ships were sent to trade or pillage and even pillage .
 In a few instances, to found colonies, although none of the latter survived . In some cases, the colonies were found to be colonies, but none survived .
 Britain, France and Holland founded empires in America and the (Caribbean in the 17th century . From these beginnings Britain, . France and . Holland founded . empires in the . 17th Century .
 In the British mainland colonies the slave population increased rapidly . In the Caribbean harsh irwirwit and Iropkol diseases prevented iis natoial growth and eocau raged .
 The indigenous people of North America lived mainly in semisedentary or nomadic societies . North American colonists never attempted to live from their labour as the Spanish colonists did in parts of South America .
 The main contacts between Europeans and Native Americans were through the fur trade, where furs were supplied by native trappers, and through warfare . Some Native Americans are enslaved as in South Carolina .
 Native Americans responded to the arrival and settlement of the Europeans on the east coast by moving west, leaving depopulated regions to be settled by migrants from Europe . In general the Native Americans moved west to avoid depopulation .
 These migrants were mostly people seeking economic betterment or freedom from religious persecution . Migrants were mostly seeking economic . betterment . or freedom . persecution .
 Taking advantage of the region’s rich natural resources, they created prosperous farming communities . The communities are specializing in the production of grain, livestock and timber, and benefiting from the relatively disease-free environment .
 Conditions in the plantation colonies of the southern mainland and the Caribbean were very different . Conditions were similar to those in the Caribbean and southern mainland .
 Disease was rife, discouraging free migration and killing many who did take the risks of settlement . White indentured servants provided years of unpaid labour in exchange for their passage and a plot of land .
 Some 200,000 of these servants migrated to British plantation colonies, fewer to the French Caribbean . They were employed in the production of tobacco and other plantation staples for export to Europe .
 From around 1650, there was a fundamental change in the labour system of the plantation colonies . The labour system began to change in 1650 .
 The shift from tobacco to sugar caused an explosive increase in the demand for labour which could not be met by Britain and France . The rise in demand for sugar labour was not met by the UK and France, but by France .
 In the northern colonies this pushed agricultural settlement into the interior . In the . northern colonies, this pushed . agricultural settlement .
 In the southern colonies the coastal regions intensified the slave-plantation production of tobacco . To which was added rice and indigo in South Carolina and Georgia .
 Settlement also spread into southern ‘backcountries’ temperate mixed farming zones . Economic and social development was akin to that of the northern colonies .
 The French mainland colonies in Canada and Louisiana achieved a massive territorial expansion to 1763, but their demographic and economic development was very slow . The French colonies were very slow to develop as a result .
 In the Caribbean, both the British and French slave-plantation economies grew rapidly . The British slave-planted economy grew rapidly.
 Neither Britain nor France exercised much political influence over their colonies until the 1660s, when France established an authoritarian system with military governors and powerful colonial officials accountable to the king .
 Britain also created royal bureaucracies but their power was shared with elected legislative assemblies . The power of the royal bureaucracy is shared with the power of an elected assembly .
 Both governments subjected imperial trade to strict mercantilist controls . The colonies were required to trade exclusively with their mother countries . Imperial trade was strictly controlled by the British Empire .
 colonial trade was the fastest growing sector of international commerce in the period . The benefits reaped by Britain and France were enormous .
 Colonization wiw Caiosbean 1625-1263 Colcne* of norfh Euupon powers. Ik'1 :.2 Colonization . Ik'2:.2: . Colonization.2 :. 2:2: 2:3:
 The British northern colonies exported relatively little to Britain, but they imported vast quantities of manufactured goods from Britain . They covered their trade deficits by exporting foodstuffs, raw materials and shipping services to the Caribbean and southern Europe .
 The strengthening of government in North America also had diplomatic consequences . North America strengthened by the strengthening of the U.S. government .
 Between 1689 and 1763 Britain and France fought four major wars conflicts that became increasingly focused on colonial disputes . The two countries fought four wars between 1689-1763 .
 Post-war British attempts to make their colonists share the burden of the huge military costs also preciptated the American Revolution . With that, with that, the collapse of British imperial power on the mainland .
 During the 17th century the British ond the French made significant inroads into Spanish territory in the Caribbean . establishing colonies in Jamaica and St Domingue as well as on the islands of the Lesser Antilles .
 The economies of these colonies were based on sugar plantations worked by African slaves . The economies were based heavily on sugar plantation work by African slave workers .
 Under the Treaty of Paris in 1763, Britain took Canada and all territory east of the Mississippi . Spain acquired the vast territory of French Louisiana from Britain .
 The Seven Years War 1756-43 | Brtisi possessions 1756 | Frwdi possessors 1756 L_Spcmitfi prcwswiis 1756 —■ Bnttih ArquBifom 1763 Spatiisli uquB
 Fewer slaves were imparted la British North America because of hatter conditions there allowed slave populations to increase nnlurnlly . Fewer slave population was imparted in North America .
 Portuguese, Dutch, British and French slave labour was the most important form of labour in four of the empires .
 In the fifth century the Spanish African slaves played a significant role in Spain . In the 18th century, they played an increasing role in slavery .
 Slavery' was an important element of European imperialism in the Americas because of the scarcity of labour in relation to the regions abundant natural resources . Slavery was important to the region's development of slavery .
 Exploitation of indigenous population was a strategy used in Spanish Mexico and Peru . The sedentary and economically advanced American Indian societies provided labour and tribute payments to the Spanish as they had to their former Aztec and Inca overlords .
 The semisedentary 1 and nomadic Native American peoples who occupied much of Spanish North America could not satisfy the white colonists’ demands for labour and commodities . Attempts to enslave these peoples proved unsuccessful partly because they exhibited fearful mortality rates in captivity .
 The shortage of labour was even more acute in the tropical colonies, where the hot and humid climate and the constant threat of disease discouraged free migrants from settling . White migrants preferred to become independent farmers rather than wage labourers*
 Since the late 15th century African slaves had heen used on plantations on Europeaneolonized Atlantic islands such as Madeira and Sao Tome .
 First, they and their offspring, who were treated as chattels, could be coerced into almost any form of work . Second, their supply was infinitely more elastic than the availability of labour from indigenous sources .
 The first major slave economies were created in the Spanish and Portuguese empires . About 500,000 slaves were imported between 1500 and 1650 between Spain and Portugal . The growth of the slave economies was the growth of slave economies .
 The Portuguese concentrated their slaves in the sugar plantations of coastal Brazil . The Spanish used theirs in a number of regional economies . The most important were the sugar and wine estates of Pern and Mexico and silver mines of northern Mexico .
 The Portuguese expanded their sugar plantation system in Brazil . They imported hundreds of thousands of slaves to work the diamond and gold mines in the interior of the country .
 The vast majority of Spanishowned slaves were employed not in Mexico and Peru but on the sugar and cocoa plantations of Cuba and Venezuela and in the gold-mines .
 These formerly peripheral regions of the Spanish Empire became increasingly important, entering the mainstream of the HpanishAmerican economy in ihe 18th century .
 The Dutch and French poured slaves into their Caribbean and Guyanese colonies . They produced sugar, coffee and other plantation staples .
 Conditions of life for slaves in the Americas were determined by the labour requirements of the plantation crops that they cultivated and the disease environments in which they lived . British and French colonists imported smaller numbers of slaves into the tobacco-producing colonies of Virginia and Maryland, the rice and indigo economies of
 Most were employed on large-scale sugar and coffee plantations in the tropical and semi-tropical zones . They were ravaged by diseases such as dysentery and yellow fever . Most of the workers were employed in tropical and tropical zones .
 The extent of the natural decline of slave populations can be gauged from the example of the British Caribbean colonies, which imported some 1. million slaves during this period, but by 1800 had an African-Caribbean population of 500,000 .
 Part 3 of the slave populations for example, those in the tobacco colonies of Virginia and Maryland who benefited from adequate food supplies, an environment less conducive to disease than was to he found in the tropical colonies .
 The period from 1810 to 1880 represented the final era of slavery in the Americas . Abolition ani> the slave trade ani.
 Although a number of countries abolished their transatlantic slave trades (Britain in 1807 and the United States in 1810), American slavery continued to expand .
 The plantations of Brazil and of the Spanish and French colonies in the Caribbean Imported nearly two million slaves between 1810 and 1800 . The plantations  brought in 2 million slaves .
 In Cuba the slave population more than doubled in these years, while in the southern United States, mainly engaged in cotton production, increased by natural means from 0.7 million to 3*7 million . The slave population of the southern U.S. increased in the same period from 0
 The abolition of slavery, as opposed to that of the slave trade* was a long process which extended from the 1820s up to the 1880s . The abolition was the result of the abolition of the institution of slavery .
 The number of slave revolts increased in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . None succeeded in achieving local abolition in French St. Domingue .
 The end of slavery was brought about partly by the economic decline of the slave economies but largely by political events in particular, war and revolution . Instead of economic decline, it was largely by the decline of slave economies .
 Several of the newly independent Spanish-American republics outlawed slavery between 1824 and 1829 . Slavery in the British West Indies was abolished by a reforming British government in 1834 . In the United States slavery was ended in 1865 by the victory of the Union states over the Confederate states
 Stave populations in the vast area of Spanish mainland America were quite modest by comparison by comparison . Stave population in Spain was quite modest .
 The brutal conditions ol slavery throughout the Americas caused frequent slave revolts which were suppressed with great ferocity . Slave revolts were suppressed by the slave owners .
 Amsterdam was merely first among equals in the densely urbanized Netherlands . Bristol, Newcastle and Exeter lagged far behind London both in size and rates of growth .
 1620 saw the beginning of a period of economic crisis and stagnation in many parts of Europe . A fter more than a century of economic growth, 1620 was the start of economic stagnation in Europe .
 The economic decline of Spain and Italy was accompanied by the migration of skilled labour and capital to the north . The decline of the Spanish and Italian economies has been accompanied by migration of capital and skilled labour .
 The Dutch retained and expanded their share of Baltic commerce to achieve a near-monopoly of the region’s trade by 1650 . English trade with the Baltic grew significantly from the 1670s onwards .
 The 17th century was also the period of England’s “apprenticeship” to the Dutch Republic . Holland is often described as Holland's ‘golden age’
 Protestant refugees were welcomed in the towns of southern England and the northern Netherlands . In the wake of the Dutch revolt against Spain in 1572 and also after the revocation of the Edict of Nantes by the French crown in 1685 .
 Bringing with them expertise in new industries and industrial processes, including brewing, papermaking, glass and ceramics, and silk weaving, they made a significant impact on the economy .
 By the early 18th century an international division of labour was emerging, shaped as much by government policy as by market forces . The division of work was shaped by the government policy of government policy and market forces, as much as government policy .
 In France and England especially, new forms of economic nationalism had emerged during the 1 Population trends in Europe 1600-1790 Papulation ti milbom 30 .
 From around 1650 populations in southern Europe and Germany began to increase, while overall numbers in England and the Netherlands stagnated . 1660s and 1670s were embodied in policies designed to promote overseas and colonial trade, and industrial diversification, at the expense of competitors .
 Anglo-Dutch and AngloFrench rivalry sharpened by imposition of protectionist import duties and restrictions on the export of raw materials .
 Anglo-Dutch competition was evident in many fields, including the North Sea herring fisheries, woollen textile manufacture, textile dyeing and finishing, and by the 18th century, sugar refining, tobacco refining and tobacco processing .
 Dutch excelled by virtue of their success in controlling the markets for finished products . These activities all involved processing and as such were fields in which they excelled .
 English industry was more deeply embedded in the domestic manufacturing economy, and relied on the labour of rural households . English industry, on the other hand, relied heavily on rural labour .
 Trade rivalry and industrial competition created an international climate in which warfare became endemic, from the Anglo-Dutch wars of 1652, 1665-67 and 1672-74, to the intermittent Anglo-French struggles of 1689-1815 . The British and French wars of the 16
 Military expenditure by the British state multiplied fivefold between the 1690s and the Napoleonic Wars . The British state provided a huge stimulus to the industrial and construction sectors .
 Shipbuilding, metallurgical and arms industries, civil engineering and the building of naval dockyards stimulated employment, investment and innovation through increased public spending .
 The Anglo-French wars of the 18th century were a struggle for economic supremacy as much as for political power in Europe, India and North America . Adam Smith realized that the wars were fought over economic supremacy in Europe and India .
 On eve of the American War of Independence British imports from the West Indies and the American colonies far exceeded those from either the North Sea or the Mediterranean zones .
 In the last resort, however, European economies were dependent on their natural resources and the legacy of political history . The European economy was dependent on its natural resources .
 This was especially true in the case of agricultural and primary production, and the extent to which nations and regions were able to commercialize these sectors . This is especially true for the agricultural sector, especially in the United States .
 The Dutch chose to develop a compact and specialized agricultural sector and rely on large-scale food imports . The English chose agricultural self-sufficiency, protectionism and, after 1689, the manipulation of food prices in the interests of producers by means of subsidized exports .
 French peasant agriculture, on the other hand, was constrained by labour-intensive farming methods and a host of geographical, political and institutional limitations, was strongly resistant to commercialization . The French peasant farming was strongly resisted by labour intensive farming methods .
 Britain was able to surge forward towards industrialization with plentiful energy sources . Britain's energy sources were able to boost industrialization .
 The availability of coal released British producers from dependence on organic materials such as timber and charcoal . Dutch peat supplies were becoming exhausted at the time .
 The Dutch Republic faced the limitations of a city-state underpinned by merchant capital just as Britain was emerging as a strong nation-state, with a developing industrial base .
 France's overseas trade accelerated more rapidly than England's in the 18th century . Fivefold increase during the period from 1716 to 1788 double the increase registered for England at this time .
 Woollen cloth, linens, fustians and silk were the main textiles produced in the 19th century .
 Coalmining was concentrated in England and Scotland, from where coal was exported to nearby Europe .
 Dutch merchants -such as the one on the right in this painting - were to be found throughout the world, from the Baltic to the Americas and Asia . A During Holland's ""golden age"" in the 17th century, Dutch merchants were found in Holland .
 From the 1650s their dominant role in European and world trade was increasingly threatened by the English . However, from the 16.50s onwards, their dominance in European trade was threatened .
 In many of the colonized parts of the Americas and Asia the production of a narrow range of primary products for export markets was encouraged, thus planting the seeds of future economic dependency and backwardness .
 The rivalry between European states produced a world divided into commercial empires . However, in the rush to exploit all these, the rivalry between the European states led to the rise of the world's commercial empires.
 In the short term the discoveries probably acted as a drain on European commercial and financial resources, particularly those of Spain and Portugal . The discoveries are likely to continue to drain resources in the short-term .
 The profits from the silver mines of Spanish America and the Portuguese spice trade were substantial for those directly involved . But while the outflow of precious metals from the Americas may have quickened economic activity in Europe, it also intensified the inflationary pressures that were already present .
 The growth of transoceanic trade made little impact on the European economy before the 1550s . It has been suggested that it was not until the late 17th century that commercial and industrial profits from European trade with Asia and the Americas became visible and significant .
 Iberian overseas trade and investment had become more widely diffused across Europe . Benefits accrued principally to the Dutch Republic, followed closely by England and, later, France .
 Spain and Portugal relied on the formation of government agencies to promote colonial and commercial enterprise . The newer colonial states adapted existing forms of corporate organization to serve new purposes .
 English and Dutch East India Companies can be seen as forerunners of modern multinational corporations . In this respect, they were seen to be forerunners to the modern multinational corporation .
 Independent companies wielded great political power at home and abroad . Owned by shareholders, managed by boards of directors and employing accountants and other salaried workers .
 Their efficiency and impact of their monopoly powers have been questioned . But they undoubtedly played an important role in the expansion and integration of the global economy .
 Trade in the Far East was enmeshed with politics and diplomacy, and required powerful trading bodies to act on behalf of states . Trade in Asia required powerful trade bodies to intervene in behalf of countries .
 Trade was conducted mainly by private, unincorporated merchants in North America and the Caribbean . With the exception of the Dutch West India Company, trade was conducted by private merchants .
 Merchants operated through social networks that were formed on the basis of religious, family and other personal ties . Such merchants operated through . social networks were formed .
 Transatlantic commerce was conducted by British merchants operating through colonial agents . Local merchants increased their share of trade from the early years of the 18th century, especially in the northern colonies .
 English Navigation Act of 1651 effectively established a national monopoly which played an important role in undermining Dutch competition during the following century . The act was not necessary for the development of trade with North America, but it was necessary to establish a monopoly .
 Americas, Europe and the Far East became inextricably linked through trade, shipping and bullion flows . As the world economy expanded, the Americas and Europe were linked by trade .
 Baltic imports contributed to the expansion of long-distance trade . The flow of Asian imports silk, calico, spices and drugs brought consumer goods to Europe .
 It was not until the second half of the 18th century that the amount of silver bullion exported to Asia fell sharply . This was compensated for by rising exports of British manufactured goods .
 A major stimulus behind the commercial revolution of the 17th century was an increase in consumer demand . The stimulus to commercial expansion was the increase in demand for consumer goods .
 In spite of demographic stagnation in Europe, towns and cities continued to expand . As they did so new patterns of consumption and social behaviour evolved .
 Spice, tobacco, tea, coffee, sugar, tropical fruit, dyestuffs and Asian textiles contributed to the diversification of consumption habits .
 Such commodities resulted in the development of coffee houses, more fashionable clothing and household furnishings, and new domestic rituals such as tea-drinking .
 Maize and potatoes helped to feed Europe’s growing population in the 18th century . They were not competing with home-produced foodstuffs .
 New industries such as sugar refining, tobacco processing, cotton manufacture and textile printing developed as a result of long-distance trade and colonial development .
 Despite the benefits of trade with Asia and the Americas, economic growth in Europe depended mainly on trade within Europe itself, and on improvements in domestic agriculture and manufacturing .
 Long-distance trade was expensive, not always profitable, and did not contribute a great deal to capital formation within those countries which were at the core of the world economy . It was expensive and often not profitable, but it was important for the world's economies .
 Competition between European states and the consequent need to defend, administer and control colonial territories involved increased public expenditure and more complex government administration .
 The countries that gained most from this economic expansion were nation-states such as France and England, which were capable of developing the machinery of strong central government .
 Mercantilism aimed to increase employment through the encouragement of overseas trade, especially the import of essential raw materials, while protecting home industry by the imposition of high import duties . Mercantillism aimed at increasing employment .
 In comparison with the English and French variants, Dutch mercantilism remained weak and incidental, particularly in the colonial field . In comparison .
 The decentralized federal structure of the United Provinces, together with the deeply entrenched interests of its merchants overseas, inhibited the kind of aggressive unity that was partly behind the increasing power of its larger neighbours France and England .
 Silver from Central and South America reached Europe via Spain and Portugal, where it entered the arteries of world trade . Silver from the mines of Central and . South America was the source of most of the world's silver production .
 From 1500 to around 1650, there was general growth of towns ond cities of all sizes . In the first of these, from 1500 to 1650 there was a general growth in towns on the rise .
 In the second phase, between 1650 and 1750, a few large cities most notably London, Paris and Amsterdam expanded rapidly . In the third phase, there was an increase in the size and number of smaller cities .
 In the 16th century the most urbanized regions in Europe were the Netherlands, Italy and the Netherlands . The Netherlands and Italy had the highest proportion of people living in towns and cities .
 From the early 17th century, urban growth subsided in the last two regions . Cities in the northern Netherlands expanded rapidly, in common with those of England and Scotland .
 There were, however, many features of London that continued to pose a threat to the health ond safety of its citizens, including the streets that were often rutted dirt tracks strewn with mounds of rubbish . There were also rutting dirt tracks that often pose a danger
 The standard of sanitation was very poor and was to be the cause of many outbreaks of cholera and typhus throughout the 18th and 19th centuries . Many outbreaks were caused by poor sanitation standards which led to outbreaks of disease .
 In the early 16th century a European-centred world economy was emerging, characterized not only by the rise of transoceanic trade but also by new patterns of urban growth .
 Between 1500 and 1800 the towns and cities of Europe came to form a single urban system . The integration of regional trading networks and the commercialization of predominantly rural economies led to the creation of the urban system in Europe .
 The Dutch Republic approached a ceiling in the mid-17th century because in the preceding century there had been no increase in the number of smaller centres from which cities could be developed .
 England, by contrast, contained hundreds of market towns and industrial villages capable of expansion . England's population grew rapidly in the 1930s and 1940s, but it was largely confined to small towns and villages .
 By the early 19th century the rate of urban growth in Britain had reached that reached that attained by the Dutch a century earlier, but at a much higher level of population . By the mid-19th century, urban growth had reached similar levels in Britain, reaching that of the Dutch
 In both countries, however, a single dominating commercial centre had emerged by 1700 . In 1700s, a dominant commercial centre emerged in both countries .
 In 1600 about 5 per cent of the English population lived in London . By 1700 this proportion had reached 10 per cent, much higher than in other European capital cities . Amsterdam contained 8 per cent Dutch population .
 The exceptional position of London may account for the rapid development of the English economy in the late 17th and 18th centuries, at a time when London was absorbing half the natural increase of the entire population .
 This rapid expansion led to problems of overcrowding and insanitary conditions, bringing disease and high death rates . The rapid expansion of the hospital led to overcrowding, disease and deaths .
 It was only through substantial migration from the countryside that London and other large cities could continue to grow . It was therefore only through migration from countryside that the city could continue its growth .
 A more healthy environment for Londoners only began to evolve with the replacement of timber by brick as a building material, and the introduction of building regulations after the Great Fire of London in 1666 .
 Amsterdam's outer girdle of canals began construction in 1613 . Dutch city was first planned for 1613, when construction began in 1616 . Amsterdam is the first city to have a canal system .
 These cities were gradually overtaken by nation states in the deployment of commercial wealth, capital and military power . However, these cities were eventually overtaken as the most powerful cities .
 In Germany towns and cities lost their autonomy as princes absorbed them into petty feudal states . In Italy, towns themselves became city states .
 The Dutch Republic was forged in the struggle against Spanish centralization in the late 16th century . It emerged as a federation of city states dominated by Amsterdam as first among equals .
 In the advanced pre-industrial economies of Europe, dominant cities acted as centres of innovation in many fields, especially in the luxury trades, textile finishing, scientific instrument making, printing, and the fine and decorative arts .
 European cities had played a key role in the dissemination of knowledge in Europe . Since the 12th century, universities had begun to take over the educational role of the monasteries .
 London's meteoric growth continued unabated . The notable exception to this rule was London, whose meteoric rise was seen in 2013 .
 The population of London expanded from about 120,000 in 1550 to 575,000 by 1700 . The growth of European cities 1500-1800 Population 1,000,000 .
 10 per cent of English population was part of the public sphere of political debate, scientific discourse, and literary and aesthetic criticism . Public sphere of public sphere was a uniquely high proportion in comparison with other European cities at the time .
 Newspapers first appeared in London in the 1620s, and by the 1690s they were carrying regular advertisements for a wide range of goods and commercial ventures . Newspapers were used for books, medicines, medicines and real estate and auction sales .
 Amsterdam led the way in the circulation and analysis of commercial information . Informal business correspondence was transformed into printed lists of commodity prices from 1613 onwards . Amsterdam was the first city to publish lists of commodities prices .
 Population levels rose in Europe after 1750, a new pattern of urban growth began to unfold . New urban centres began to be built in Europe's first urban centres .
 Expansion was no longer confined to the larger cities; indeed, it was the growth of small cities and the emergence of new urban centres which lay behind an overall increase in urbanization .
 There are two possible explanations for this, both arising from the overall growth in population . There are also possible reasons for this growth in the population .
 First, there was an increased demand for food, which in turn stimulated the rural sector . The expansion of regional marketing and administrative centres was also important .
 The clustering of rural producers in and around industrial villages during the preceding century had created the basis for several new manufacturing centres that were now able to emerge in response to growing markets . Second, the clustering .
 From the mid-16th century botanical gardens were established in many university towns . In the following century academies of science added a new dimension to the range of institutions which promoted learning .
 B etween the early 16th and mid-18th centuries there was a remarkable growth both in the understanding of the natural world and in the capacity to exploit it .
 In 1500 the study of mathematics was well established in major universities across Europe . By the end of the 16th century it was a central discipline in both Protestant and Catholic centres of learning .
 The idea that the world should be represented geometrically formed a central strand of the Renaissance . It was especially influential in the development of perspective representation by Italian painters and architects .
 The research of a number of people including Nicolaus Copernicus and Johannes Kepler suggested that God’s Creation had been made according to a mathematical blueprint .
 England was briefly predominant in the field of natural philosophy following the publication of Newton’s Principia Mathematica in 1687 . Basel, St Petersburg, and Paris became centres of European scientific creativity .
 The works of Aristotle formed the basis of the university curriculum until the end of the 17th century . Cartesian and Newtonian doctrines began to take hold in most of Europe .
 Innovation in the exact sciences ceased to be universitybased after the late 16th century . With the exception of Newton’s research at Cambridge, innovation in exact sciences stopped in England .
 Part 3 of correspondence which connected individuals in all the major European cities . The most significant were those organized in the 17th century by Marin Mersenne, Samuel Hartlib and Henry Oldenburg .
 Many of these letters were printed in philosophical journals the Journal des Savants and the Philosophical Transactions which were established in the 1660s . Many of the letters were published in the journals established in 1660 .
 The development of botany from the late 15th century European voyages to the Americas, Africa and Asia provided novel and extraordinary facts which greatly supplemented and even contradicted the existing Classical texts .
 Botany galvanized by information and samples pouring in from places outside Europe . Botany was galvanized with information from outside Europe.
 By 1585 peppers from South America were being cultivated in Italy, Castile and Moravia . From the Americas came maize, potatoes, runner beans and runner beans, pineapples and sunflowers .
 Scientific instruments accelerated the development of botanical and zoological knowledge across Europe in the 17th and early 18th centuries .
 The development of the telescope revolutionized the study of astronomy . Major new astronomical discoveries were made by scholars in London, Danzig, The Hague and Rome .
 Research into the existence and nature of a vacuum linked developments in natural philosophy to those in technology .
 A vacuum was impossible in the Aristotelian system, but in the 1640s experimenters in France argued that the space at the top of a tube inverted in a bowl of mercury was void of matter .
 At about the same time Otto von Guericke of Magdeburg began trials with the evacuation of air from a copper surrounding . At the time, air from the surrounding was being evacuated from the air .
 His ideas were taken up by Robert Boyle and Robert Hooke in Oxford, who constructed an air-pump with a glass receiver in 1659 .
 The Dutchman Christiaan Huygens supervised the construction of a pump at the Academie Royale in Paris in 1665 . A number of instrument makers sold different sorts of pumps in the 1670s .
 There were also momentous developments in the area of industrial technology . Industrial technology was the subject of many of the world's most famous inventions .
 Steam engines emerged as a response to the need to rid mines of water . As pits dug deeper and deeper to extract coal and minerals such as tin and lead, steam engines emerged .
 At the start of the 17th century a number of people considered the possibility of using steam to raise water, either for clearing mines or producing fountains and cascades for aristocratic gardens .
 Denis Papin was a pioneer of air-pump design . He was also influential in the early history of the steam engine . Papin's air pump design was also extremely influential .
 He worked on air-pumps with Boyle and Huygens in the 1670s . He wrote an article in 1690 describing how steam could raise a piston then be allowed to fall due to atmospheric pressure .
 Papin’s article may well have influenced Thomas Savery, who produced the first workable apparatus for raising water by fire at the end of the 1690s .
 Savery was the latest in a line of engine constructors based around London . Although his machine was practical in limited situations, it was of no help in deep mines .
 Thomas Newcomen’s pistondriven atmospheric engine revolutionized the design of steam engines towards the end of the 18th century . It was the Englishman who would transform industry in the period before James Watt’�s innovations .
 The design of Newcomen’s engine was a closely guarded secret . For the first 15 years no machine outside Britain could be made to work without the support of a British engineer .
 The success of the Newtonian system and the domination enjoyed by the British in the art of engine design throughout the 18th century are indicative of the geographical shift in innovation which had drifted northwards from Italy .
 Steam created in the cylinder forced the piston up; cold water was then used to condense the steam, creating a vacuum . Cold water was used to create a vacuum in a cylinder .
 Atmospheric pressure caused the piston to move down, raising the other end of the rocking beam and lifting the pumping rod . Atmospheric pressure then caused the pump to lift the piston down .
 From the 1650s the air-pump was developed in a number of European cities . By the 1670s air pumpers were on sale in Paris .
 Musschenbroek brothers became the most important supplier of air-pumps, telescopes and microscopes in Europe . Leiden was the first to develop a centre of production in Leiden .
 The first Newcomen engine was installed in 1712 at Dudley Castle in Staffordshire . The design was quickly taken up by coalfields and other mining operations across the north of England .
 Running costs were a major obstacle to its diffusion across Europe . The running costs were, however, a major stumbling block .
 A city-stale such as Kano, a markel empire such os Asante and a shrine town such os He might retain o fisted central location . The ruling courts of the Arnhora ol Ethiopia,, or the Monde of Mali, or ihe Lundo of
 Specialists in animal husbandry such as the Fukmi of West Afrka. the Somdi ol Eosi Africa or the Tsmona of South Africa become even mare mobile . The rulers ol farming communities sought out the hest ecological opportunities for gracing their cornels and
 In conlrost to ihiv fishermen and miners had fixed settlements and defended their economic assets . In the past, fishermen and mine workers had set up settlements and protected their assets . The situation has been described as a humanitarian crisis .
 The three centuries after 1500 were marked by an increase in Interaction between Africans peoples and those of the outside world .
 Foreigners exploited opportunities to recruit voluntary, involuntary, and more especially involuntary, migrant labour to serve as ships' crews and pearl divers, as household slaves and concubines . Foreigners recruited voluntary and involuntary labour as housewives, concubine and field hands .
 The central interior of Africa was only indirectly affected by the globalization of Africa’s external relations before 1800 . Local merchants and kingdoms fought over salt quarries, iron mines and fishing lakes .
 Africa's ongoing agricultural revolution took a new leap forward when traditional grains such as millet and sorghum were supplemented by tropical grains from the Americas . The traditional crops of root yam and vegetable banana were augmented by new carbohydrates processed from cassava .
 Perambulating scholars settled in Timbuktu and Kano, where local holy men synthesized their own customs with those of Mediterranean Islam .
 Islamic art and architecture spread too as seen in the great minarets of the Niger Valley, regularly coated in river clay, and the palaces of the Swahili east coast, built of carved coral .
 In western Africa, Christianity was the vehicle for religious change and adaptation . Christianity was a vehicle for adaptation in western Africa .
 In the Kongo kingdom, one faction seized power in 1506 with the help of foreign priests . Foreign priests built chapels and schools and developed powerful Christian rituals to match local ones .
 Papacy sent Capuchin friars to Kongo and the surrounding principalities with a view to spread the new religion into the provincial and rural areas . A hundred years later, the Papacy also sent Capuchinos to the provinces of Kongo to spread it .
 Rustic traditionalists proved more resistant to religious change than ambitious townsmen . Christianity created factionalism, discord and eventually a civil war . The town was founded in 17th century, but it was destroyed in 1815 .
 The impact of European merchants on the Atlantic seaboard of Africa was older, and initially more pervasive, than that of Christianity . The impact was older and more pervasive than Christianity .
 Around 40 gold-trading fortresses were built by European trading nations on the Gold Coast . The pattern of trade was different, with around 40 fortresses being built .
 Among the greatest of these castle-warehouses was Cape Coast Castle, the headquarters of the English. The English. Coast Castle .
 The Portuguese fortress at Luanda was to become Africa’s largest slave-exporting harbour on the Atlantic Ocean . Its installations were matched by the fortifications and slave-trading houses of the French on the island of Goree .
 Three attempts at colonization of parts of Africa were made by foreigners during the 16th and 17th centuries . Three attempts were made at colonization by foreigners .
 Ottomans spread through North Africa during the early 16th century . They captured cities from Cairo to Algiers and created an empire which only began to break up when Napoleon attacked Egypt in 1798 . Napoleon's Egyptian invasion of Egypt began when Egypt was attacked by Napoleon .
 The next great colonizing episode was the Portuguese attempt to gain and retain commercial dominance on both the western and eastern flanks of Africa after 1570 . The Portuguese attempted to gain commercial dominance in both the west and east .
 Unlike the Ottomans, the Portuguese were unable to conquer significant parts of the mainland, though they attempted to do so in both Morocco and Ethiopia .
 They did, however, create creole communities on the islands and in a few fortress towns, notably along the Zambezi River . Creole communities were created by the French colonialists .
 Portuguese merchants became conquistadores in the Spanish-American style in Angola . The part of Africa most vulnerable to foreign attack proved to be Angola, where Portuguese merchants were conquistador .
 The Dutch captured three strategic points between 1637 and 1652 . They captured the gold-trading castle of Elmina, the slave harbour of Luanda and the prospective military base at Gape Town .
 The Portuguese were able to recover Luanda in 1648 and resume their conquest of Angola . The Dutch influence in Angola proved pervasive .
 At Gape Town the creolized Dutch remained a distinctive segment of the population after the British captured the city in 1806 . The creolize Dutch was a distinct group of the Dutch population .
 African response to the European opening of the Atlantic to long-distance shipping was to build their markets, their cities and their royal capitals away from the coast and beyond the range of direct foreign interference .
 The Asante Empire was able to absorb several older kingdoms which had been brokers between the coast and the interior . The Asantes Empire had absorbed several older . kingdoms .
 The empire of Oyo partially eclipsed the ancient trading city of Benin and absorbed the powerful shrine city of Ife . A brash new trading state was created in Dahomey and attracted Latin American and European merchants anxious to buy prisoners of war .
 The period 1500-1800 saw an enormous increase in the scale of the American, Mediterranean and Asian purchase of slaves . Consequences of the slave trade can be traced back to the 1500s .
 Thousands of people are sold abroad each year, undermining the capacity of communities to renew themselves . In some areas, such as Angola, the consequence was a demographic haemorrhage as thousands were sold abroad .
 In Guinea the slave trade caused such acute social malaise that small communities became dominated by secret societies which manipulated a rising fear of witchcraft . The slave trade was such a problem that it led to secret societies in Guinea .
 In Niger Basin whole communities were devastated by raids which caused death, famine and disease on a spiralling scale . In the Niger Basin, raids caused death and disease which devastated communities .
 Some successful broker kingdoms built up their agrarian economies with new crops . Others preserved their population by refusing to sell young women captives abroad .
 The effects of the slave trade were to entrench violence as a way of life and create a damaging intellectual climate which presumed that white people were superior to black people . In the long term, however, the long-term, the effects of slavery have entrenched violence .
 The decolonizing of the minds of both the perpetrators and victims of the slave trade was to be a slow process, further delayed by the colonial interlude which affected Africa during the first half of the 20th century .
 Portuguese first arrived in Benin City in 1486 they found a sophisticated and wealthy kingdom . Benin was a wealthy and sophisticated kingdom . Portuguese arrived in the city of Benin in the 1486 .
 Royal patronage was the basis for the production of elaborate sculptures and artefacts . The demand for copper and brass for this work formed the basis of early trade with the Portuguese .
 This 16th-century ivory carving shows a Portuguese soldier engaged in the slave trade . The carving was probably intended for the European market .
 Europeans built fortified castle-warehouses to protect their chests of gold and stocks of textiles from plunder . They also built warehouses, cantonments, slave-pens and well-appointed residences for European governors .
 China responded to international demand and began to supply large quantities of silk, tea and porcelain to the West . This pattern changed in the 18th century when China started to supply silk and tea to the west .
 Having only small deposits of precious metals, it relied largely on imported silver and gold to support its increasingly sophisticated market economy . The country's economy is increasingly sophisticated and relies heavily on imported precious metals .
 I n 1368 the Mongols, who had ruled China since 1271, were ousted by a peasants’ revolt . The leader of the leader of which crowned himself Emperor Taizu and founded the Ming dynasty .
 Ming period marked a renaissance in China’s cultural, political and economic strength . Ming period was a period of China's cultural and political strength . The Ming period is known as China's greatest period of cultural and economic prosperity .
 It was popular throughout the Ming and subsequent Qjng period . It was to remain popular throughout Ming and Qjn period .
 An agricultural system based on small freeholds was rebuilt in Japan . Emperor Taizu tried to control the tax burden on poorer farmers .
 During the second half of the Ming period, ownership of land became increasingly concentrated in the hands of a few . Ownership of land in China was becoming increasingly concentrated .
 This led to the introduction of dual ownership, under which a freeholder could offer land for permanent lease . The land is now owned by freeholders, but it is not for permanent ownership .
 Sharecropping a system by which a proportion of the crops produced by the leaseholder is handed over in rent was also common . Sharecrops were also common in the 1930s .
 There are significant technological improvements in Chinese agriculture . There were significant technological advances in China's agriculture .
 From the second half of the 16th century new crops were adopted from the outside world . Potato and sweet potato, maize, sugar beet, tomato, kidney bean, mango, papaya, agave, pineapple, chilli and tobacco . Several improved species, such as the American peanut
 This resulted in an agricultural revolution, with an increase in the use of marginal land and, as a consequence, in agricultural production . This led to a rise in marginal land use and increased agricultural production in the UK .
 The publication of the Complete Treatise on Agricultural Administration in around 1625 also had a major impact . The publication was published in 1625 .
 Xu Guangqi was the de facto Prime Minister of China . He promoted the new crops and Western technology for water control . The author of the book was the country's de facto PM .
 The Chinese economy was able to survive the increasingly frequent natural disasters of the second half of the Ming period . As a result, the Chinese economy survived natural disasters more frequently .
 Ming China was active in domestic and foreign trade . Ming China had a history of expanding its influence in China .
 China was essentially open to foreign trade, as is evident from the outflow of ceramics and silk, and the inflow of silver that enabled China to adopt its first silver standard . China adopted its own silver standard in 1903 .
 A large number of Chinese settled in Southeast Asia, along the maritime trading routes . The Chinese are believed to be among the world's most successful Chinese immigrants .
 European Christian missionaries in China introduced Western technology . Missionaries in China also introduced technology to the West .
 Part 3 of the 16th century, were appointed to high positions in the Imperial Court . Part 3 16th Century, were . appointed to . high positions .
 Chinese influence extended by state-sponsored voyages of the early 15th century, led by Admiral Zheng He . Chinese influence was extended by the state- sponsored voyages .
 Its voyages helped to consolidate China’s sphere of influence in Asia . The voyages were the most spectacular episode in Chinese maritime history .
 In 1449 Emperor Zhu Qizhen was captured while fighting the Manchu invaders . The real danger to the empire came from the Tatar and Manchu invasions on the northern and northwestern frontiers .
 The military strength of the Ming dynasty gradually faded, and internal rebellions broke out every year from 1522 . The empire's military strength gradually faded and internal rebellion broke out each year .
 There was a decline in the efficiency of the Ming government, partly due to interference in the process of government by court eunuchs, but also because of rampant tax evasion threw the government into financial difficulties .
 Around 1573 a ‘one-whip method’ of taxation was introduced to lower administrative costs by reducing the number of different taxes levied, and to spread the tax burden more fairly . In response to this, around 1573 the “one-wing method” of
 Financial and socio-economic crises were to haunt the Ming dynasty until its downfall . This reform was short-lived, however, and financial and social crises haunted the dynasty until it was overthrown .
 The Ming dynasty ended in 1644 with the suicide of Emperor Zhu Yiujian following the fall of Beijing to rebels . The suicide of the Emperor ended the Ming dynasty with the death of Zhu Zhu .
 Officials of the Ming government enlisted the aid of the Manchus a hitherto nomadic people from beyond the Great Wall . They had adopted the Chinese culture to help them drive the rebels from Beijing .
 Once in control of the capital the Manchus refused to leave, and the rule of the Manchu Qing dynasty began . However, once in control, the Chinese government refused to let them leave the capital .
 The legitimacy of the Manchu Qing dynasty was always in question, and perhaps as a consequence it made few innovations . Its language, state machinery and economic policies were all inherited from the Ming .
 From 1800 onwards, the Qing dynasty was increasingly under threat from internal uprisings caused by famine and a corrupt government . Western powers also threatened the dynasty from the start of the dynasty .
 The territory gained was neither highly populated nor particularly fertile . However, with the exception of Manchuria, the territory gained wasn't highly populated or fertile .
 Vassal states of Korea and Annam provided the empire with only a small income . However, they did form buffer zones against potential invaders .
 Japan remained divided into a largely stable number of domains throughout the Tokugawa period . The Tokugawawa and related families together controlled over 25 per cent of the land .
 People generally identified themselves with a particular region rather than a domain, and economic and social developments occurred on a regional basis . However, people identified themselves .
 The shogunate achieved peace throughout the islands of Japan for two and a half centuries . Only through the imposition of strict controls on all classes of society and isolation from the rest of the world .
 I n 1603, after many decades of civil war, Japan came under a new structure of military government headed by the Tokugawa family . The Tokugwa family ruled Japan from 1603 to 1603 .
 The emperor, resident in Kyoto, no longer had any real political power . The Tokugawa administration, called the Shogunate or Bakufu, ruled in his name .
 Former enemies of the regime became tozama lords, while those deemed friendly were given important government posts . Those deemed friendly denoted fudai and given important posts .
 The shogunate had no power to tax within any of the domains, or, in general, to intervene in political control of these private fiefdoms .
 Its only income came from lands directly owned by the Tokugawa and related families, including the Ii and Matsudaira .
 Tokugawa implemented controls over individual lords and the population in general . In an attempt to ensure their continued dominance, they implemented controls on individual lords, the population .
 All daimyo had to visit the shogunal capital, Edo, regularly, and leave their families there as hostages . The families were kept hostage by the daimy .
 They were compelled to engage in public works to restrict their finances, and public disorder within domains could incur heavy penalties .
 A strict hereditary caste system headed by the ruling samurai caste, followed in descending order by farmers, artisans and merchants, was enforced . The samurai caste was followed by farmers and artisans .
 The economy was based on rice, with the size and wealth of the various domains measured in terms of the rice crop . The size of the domains was measured in rice, and the wealth was measured by the size .
 The daimyo paid their warrior retainers stipends measured in rice . The warrior caste as a whole marketed any surplus not required for consumption to purchase other necessities and luxuries .
 The influence of the Tokugawa over the daimyo progressively weakened . The ruling structure remained broadly unchanged until the fall of the shogunate in 1867 . Urbanization and economic growth led to urbanization and urbanization .
 The success of the regime in achieving political and social stability stimulated changes which were ultimately to contribute to its downfall . However, the very success led to the downfall of the Syrian regime .
 The need for the ruling caste to transform their rice income into cash stimulated the rise of powerful merchant families, many based in Osaka, Japan .
 These merchant houses accumulated great wealth, despite their low social status, and a growing proportion of the population engaged in educational and cultural pursuits . The merchant houses accumulate great wealth .
 Agricultural output increased with the aid of improved techniques and land reclamation . The majority of peasants ceased to be simple subsistence rice producers, becoming involved in the supply of handicrafts and other goods .
 The population, after growing in the first half of the Tokugawa period, stabilized . The population stabilized in the early 1900s .
 It is generally agreed that these economic developments were a significant factor in supporting Japan’s subsequent process of industrialization . The economic developments in Japan were a major factor in the development of Japan's industrialization.
 The scale of economic growth and change in the 17th and 18th centuries put pressure on the old system . The authorities became powerless to control the expanding commercial interests and networks .
 The daimyo and their followers found themselves in debt to rich merchants who were nominally at the bottom of the social hierarchy . Social status and wealth no longer went hand in hand, and social status no longer goes hand in .
 The distinctions between castes became blurred as individuals ceased to confine themselves to their prescribed occupations . The samurai, in particular, now had little reason to demonstrate their military role, instead becoming bureaucrats, scholars and scholars .
 Peasant uprisings peaked in tfie 1830s an era of famine wfien ufiresl nal only invoked greater numbers ion ever before . Famine also spread to embrace whole regions, with many suffering from hunger .
 Rioii ng occurred both in lawns and in the countryside, culminaiing in a major uprising in Osaka in 1837, HOKKAIDO Sodo hfond 2 Wajor transport routes in The Late TOKUGAWAWA PERIOD .
 These roules were also used by the common people, and ihis was a contributory factor in the incasing mobility of the papulation in the later years of ihe Tokugawo regime . The shogunale policy of bringing members of the samurai warrior doss into the
 The ruling caste lost out through their dependence on relatively fixed riee prices at a time of inflation . The lower strata of agricultural workers and urban residents proved highly vulnerable to crop failures and market manipulation .
 The ultimate failure of the ruling caste in many areas particularly those controlled by the shogunale and its closest followers to cope adequately with the effects of all these pressures fundamentally weakened the system . The system is now vulnerable to political and military opposition from within, and Western threats from without, writes
 After 1853, Western countries managed to breach Japans seclusiomst policy, their presence further weakened the integrity of the already shaky system, and contributed to growing internal conflicts . Western countries breached the seclusionist policy after 1853 .
 In 1867 these resulted in the downfall of the Tokugawa and the establishment by its enemies of a newregime, nominally headed by the emperor, the following year . This year the enemies of the emperor established a new regime of Japan .
 The area east af the Euphrates was the subject of dispute between ihe Ottomans and Safavids in the 16ih and early 17lh centuries . It was finally agreed with the Peace of Zohab ini 639 . A boundary between the two empires was finally
 Ottoman and Safavid states represented twin peaks of Islamic political and cultural achievement . Each handed down a powerful and complex legacy to the modem Islamic world .
 From the mid-15th century to 1683 the Ottoman Empire was one of the most successful and militarily effective states of all time . From the 15th century until 1683 it was also a successful and successful state of the time . The Ottoman Empire is one of world's most
 Its sultan, whom Western contemporaries called ‘The Grand Signlor’, was regarded with immense respect throughout Christendom . The sultan was regarded by Western contemporaries as ‘Grand Signlor,’
 J_L_ Black S40 OTTOMAN EMPIRE gunnery, the maintenance of a navy and an effective system of military recruitment and training . The maintenance of the navy and the effectiveness of a military recruitment system .
 Originally, the Ottoman Janissary regiments were maintained by the devshinw the “gathering’ of child slave recruits from the margins of the empire . They eventually were able to leave military service as free Muslims . Originally, they were kept in the ‘g
 By the 17th century local, Muslim-born recruits were beginning to dominate the army . However, local Muslims began to dominate their army .
 The Ottoman state displayed a high level of religious tolerance for the substantial proportion of the empire's subjects who were not Ottoman Turks or even Muslims .
 Members of minority communities became senior Ottoman commanders and administrators . Orthodox Greek community was probably richer and more numerous than that of the ruling Ottoman Turks .
 The Ottoman economy was based on an agricultural society which supported a system of military and religious fiefdoms . The Ottoman society was based around agricultural society and supported a military system of fiefdom . The economy was dominated by the Ottoman Empire .
 Greeks, Armenians, Syrians and Sephardi Jews dominated many of the empire’s cities and towns . A vital adjunct to this peasant world was provided by the empire's most notable and outward-looking communities, the Greeks .
 As late as the 17th century there was no sign that policy-makers in Constantinople believed that Ottoman territorial authority had reached saturation point or achieved natural frontiers .
 The Ottoman threat to Italy faded and Vienna the Hud Apple of tlie West"" in < )ttoman military folklore remained a prize that eluded the sultans . Vienna was the "Apple of the West"
 The defeat of the last great Ottoman expedition to Vienna in 1683 marked the beginning of the empire’s long decline . The defeat marked the end of the Ottoman Empire's long decline in power .
 Safavids made their mark by nurturing the culture that defines modern Iran . The Safavid state was one of Iran's most successful states . Safavid culture was forged by the Safavid .
 The founder of the Safavid dynasty was Shah Ismail I it.01-24), who re-established a central government amid political chaos into which Persia had fallen in the aftermath of Tiniur-leng .
 Ismail's partisans were the Qizilbash red-capped Turcoman devotees of the Safawi religious brotherhood . Ismail was the leader of the Ismail regime in the early 1950s .
 UR^TAN i ' ^ ^ ^ - linking his and their ambitions to the establishment of “Twelver Shiism w as the religion of the Persian state.” .
 In the wider Islamic world, this nostalgic Shiite tradition was increasingly a marginal or sectarian faith, regarded by the Sunni majority as heretical . The Sunni majority considered it heretical and considered heretical.
 In Safavid Persia, Shiism became the defining national creed, providing the Safavids with an ideological focus . Shiism was a key part of the Safavid state of Iran .
 Safavid shahs most notably Abbas 1 were deliberate propagandists of Shiite culture . Abbas 1 and Abbas 1 of the shahs were deliberately propagating Shiite culture in Iran .
 They were patrons of representational art, usually in miniature, and undertook a magnificent building programme of religious architecture, palaces and public works .
 Ottoman Turks inherited from Byzantine predecessors a determination to keep the Black Sea dependent on Constantinople . The greatest splendours survive in Abbas Is capital, Estahau .
 Shah Ismail and his Qizilhash forces began to infiltrate eastern Anatolia from Tabriz in the early 16th century . They provoked a massive military response from the Ottoman Empire .
 Ottoman artillery gained dramatic victory over the lightly-armed Persians at Chaldiran in 1514 . The armies of Sultan Selim the Grim were in the forefront of contemporary military capacity .
 The Battle of Chaldiran appears to have shifted the centre of gravity of the Persian Empire to the cast, but it was not a final encounter . The battle was not the first encounter between the two sides of the world .
 The standard pattern in this long conflict was one of an Ottoman offensive countered by Persian “scorched earth"" and guerrilla tactics . Ottoman offensive was countered with Persian "scorchch earth"" tactics .
 Shah Abbas I was briefly able to set the Safavid forces on the offensive and reconstitute most of the empire once ruled by his predecessor Ismail . The eventual settlement, enshrined in the Peace of Zuhab in 1639, favoured the Ottomans .
 It divided rather than defined communities, splitting Sunni from Sunni and Shiite from Shiite . It formed the basis for the frontier between the Ottoman and Persian empires . It survived as the Iran—Iran border .
 The Safavid Empire continued until the invasion of its lands by the Ghilzai Afghans in 1722 heralded the demise of the dynasty in 1736 . The invasion of the Afghan land by the Afghans heralded its demise .
 The Ottoman and Safavid states governed lands that had been in contact with a wider world since antiquity . The world of merchants and caravans was ruled by the Ottomans and the Safavid .
 Many Ottoman and Safavid traders were also Muslim pilgrims undertaking journeys to Mecca . Many of the traders were involved in the pilgrimage .
 Safavid contacts with the Western world were tenuous and bedevilled by the difficulties of the Persian terrain . European adventurers did make their way to Esfahan and hack the city .
 At the same time, the powers of western Europe beg^n to establish their own sea routes to the East . Western Europe was threatening to wrest control of Eurasian trade from the Muslims .
 In 1515 the Portuguese captured Ormuz, a Gulf market for horses and spices, but they lost it again to the Safavids in 1622 . The Portuguese captured the city in 1515, but lost it to them again in 1522 .
 Thereafter, the old trade in spices and silk and a new trade m tea continued to he serviced by caravan routes into the 18th century .
 The territory ruled by the Ottomans and Safavids was crisscrossed by land and sea routes used by merchants and pilgrims alike . The territory was crossed by land, sea routes and trade routes .
 Sea travel is risky but could be relatively straightforward on Mediterranean short baps or in regions governed by the alternating monsoon winds . Sea travel was risky, but it could be easier on Mediterranean baps .
 Overland traffic was arduous and slaw but continued to play an important role io trade with Asia until well into the 18th century . Overland trade continued to be an important part of trade until the end of the 1800s .
 During the reign of Akbar, between 1556 and 1605, it was much expanded and became a centrally governed state . During Akbar's reign, the state of India became a central government state .
 India became the workshop of the world known to Europeans . As a result, India became known to Europe as a workshop .
 Babur was of Turkic origin and traced his ancestry back to Timur-leng and to Ghinggis Khan, the Mongol Emperor of China . Babur is the first Mongol ruler of the Mongol Empire to be born in Mongolia .
 His advance from Kabul was at the expense of Afghan warlords who themselves had spread into the plains of India, conquering the Sultanate of Delhi and establishing the Lodi dynasty . His advance was at expense of the Afghan warlord who had conquered Delhi .
 Akbar Babur’s successor, Humayan, faced a resurgence of Afghan power . Humayan was driven into exile between 1540 and 1555 while the empire was ruled by Sher Shah and his sons . Sher Shah was driven out of the empire in 1555 .
 Akbar used his long reign to expand the empire and consolidate and transform it . He converted the rulership founded on warrior nomadism into a centralized government .
 At the top he built a ‘service’ nobility of mansabdars who provided administration across the empire . At the heart of the empire was a “service” nobility .
 Many mansabdars were immigrants from elsewhere in the Islamic world, whose loyalty was owed exclusively to the emperor himself . The emperor himself was the only man to rely on .
 Akbar incorporated the Hindu Rajput chieftains who ruled over lower castes and commoners . Beneath them, Akbar included Hindu Rajasasas, who ruled the lower and commoner castes . Akbar also incorporated Hindu Rajaasas as Rajasans .
 These chieftains possessed local power bases which were notionally independent of Mughal authority, but their status and security were enhanced by membership of an imperial aristocracy .
 Akbar who was fascinated by all religions also promoted a cultural style which crossed strict religious boundaries . Akbar was fascinated with all religions and was fascinated in his work .
 Beneath the mansabdari -Rajput elite, the empire rested on the labour of millions of peasants and artisans . From which large revenues were extracted, large revenues from peasants were extracted . The Rajasim empire was founded by the Rajatyaya Raja dynasty
 Regional states depended on European commercial agencies such as the British East India Company . The company moved more directly into the political foreground during the 18th century .
 Frarwh >1* 5tol«Ji O Dutifi Hriihiruipittru AHMADABAD Ahmadabada AhmadaboaQ &}6I2 Surer WO 8.5.5tol » .
 India's fertile river valleys yielded substantial agricultural surpluses, which in turn supported extensive artisan industries . From at least the 10th century these industries had been drawn into trading networks stretching from Arabia to Indonesia .
 Gold and silver brought with them from the Americas, further stimulating the Indian economy . They brought with with them huge quantities of gold and silver .
 European presence also spelled danger, but its character did not become fully apparent until the 18th century .
 The empire was unable to respond to invasions from abroad or to rebellions at home . Even the munsabdari elite turned against it, as governors declared themselves independent and sought their own kingdoms .
 Mughal emperorship was abolished in 1730 . It was not formally abolished until 1857 . The real substance of power was weakening .
 Jaffna t J 60 ffbrtwwM.f The empire's collapse . Many different explanations have been put forward for the sudden collapse of the empire .
 Aurangzeb sought to expand Mughal power southwards, taking virtually the whole of the subcontinent under imperial rule . Nearly all of the problems have rooted the problem in Aurangzb’s reign .
 Aurangzeb’s long wars in the south proved extremely costly . They stretched the finances of the empire and promoted changes in its internal structures . However, in doing so he became involved in conflict against opponents whom he could neither defeat nor incorporate .
 He increased the weight of taxation, which fomented revolt in other provinces . The weight of tax increased in some provinces, fomenting revolt in others .
 Akbar became intolerant in his religious practices threatening the Hindu-Muslim accord which had marked Akbar’s empire . Frustrated by the Hindu Marat, he became increasingly intolerant .
 Aurangzeb also expanded the manstthdttri elite in ways which reduced the representation of Muslim immigrants and thus increased that of local Indian powers . To cope with the rising pressures, Auranzeb also increased the representation .
 The empire which he bequeathed to his successors in 17<I7 was already deeply strained . The empire was already being deeply strained by the years he left behind .
 There may have been other causes of Mughal decline f which point to the growing influence of a wider world .
 Rapid commercial expansion in the 17th century altered the political geography of India . An ever-growing number of trading posts were established, changing the social balance .
 Commerce was based on overseas trade and most enriched the maritime provinces . Commerce was mainly based in overseas trade . It enriched the Maritime provinces .
 It also strengthened the position of mercantile groups and the gentry classes, it also strengthened its position of power .
 The Mughal Empire was founded by warrior descendants of the “Mongol Hordc 1T” and centred on cities in India’s heartland . It was singularly ill-equipped to manage such developments .
 Id da little to contain. However, in doing so ho tame up against loos in particular, the Marathos . However, they are not the only ones to tame .
 Ihe Moralhas introduced new forms of wot fare, based on guerrilla lottks, which defied Mughal armed might . Aka, as chiefloins risen from the peasantry .
 From the 1680s Maraiha armies brake through the Mughal cordon meant to contain them, and ravaged far and wide . From 1670s onwards, the Maraiya armies were able to break through the cordon .
 A The Mug ha k are renowned for their architectural achievements, the most famous of which is the Io| Mobtg bulk between 1632 and 1648 by Shah Johan . Fainting aka flourished, particularly during the reign of Jahangir, shown here looking at a portrait of
 In 1500 the border between Prance and the Holy Roman Empire was that defined by the Treaty of Verdun in 843, with the addition to France of Dauphine in 1349 and Provence in 1481 . In 1500, the border was defined by that treaty,
 The treaties of Madrid and Cambrai fundamentally modified the border in the north by transferring Flanders and Artois from France to the Empire . The treaties were made by the Spanish Empire .
 All the European states were highly decentralized and regionalized in 1500 . In 1500, all the European countries were highly decentralized and decentralized .
 Spain consisted largely of a union of the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, with Castile itself made up of a number of component kingdoms . Spain was largely formed from the union of Aragon and Castile .
 In 1512 Ferdinand of Aragon added to this by annexing the kingdom of Navarre, though not the portion of it north of the Pyrenees . He annexed the kingdom in 1512, but not the northern part of it .
 King Philip II of Spain also became King of Portugal in 1580 . Portugal was added to the Spanish Habsburg realm in the 1580 when Philip II and Philip II became King .
 Poland was formally made up of two realms, the kingdom of Poland and the vast Grand Duchy of Lithuania . Poland was divided up into counties and governorships dominated by the nobility . The kingdom was ruled by the Polish nobility .
 Agreements reached between 1569 and 1572 turned the kingdom into an elective monarchy in which the power of the king was limited by a diet made up of senators and delegates . Agreements were made in 1569 to 1572 .
 The Russian Empire came into being as a multi-ethnic empire only after the coronation of Ivan IV in 1547 . The empire was formed from the ashes of the Crimean War .
 Though often ruled brutally, it hardly consisted of a centralized realm . For a decade of Ivan’s reign it was deliberately divided by the tsar into a personal domain, in which his word was law, and the rest of the country .
 The jurisdiction of the Holy Roman Empire was, in reality, confined to the territory north of the Alps . By the 16th century the jurisdiction was limited to the northern part of the empire .
 The Italian section continued formally as part of the Empire, with its rulers nominally invested as Imperial Vassals . But as time went on this had less and less meaning, and the Italian section was left behind .
 Swiss Confederation gained exemption from imperial duties in 1499 . Swiss Confederation was formally released from imperial jurisdiction in 1648 . Confederation was granted exemption from Imperial duties in 1649 .
 In 1500 and 1512 the rest of the Empire was organized in Imperial Circles for purposes of raising taxes and administering justice . In 1500s and 1515s the rest was organized to raise taxes and administer justice . The rest of those years were organized in the Circles .
 The Netherlands was formed as the Burgundian Circle, the northern provinces of which were formally recognized as independent of the Empire in 1648 . The Dutch was formally recognized by the Dutch Empire as an independent country .
 As a result of the Lutheran Reformation, many ecclesiastical territories were secularized after 1520 . Many of the ecclesiastical territory was secularized following the Reformation of the 1515 .
 1560 — Houndo^ of Pile Hoiv Homan. The Golden poland-uthuania . The basic constitution of the . Empire (the . basic constitution . of the Empire (The Golden . poland . Vilnadius) The . Golden . Poland-
 Law differed widely between regions, with Roman-based law of the south and customary law of north . The main distinction was between Roman law of south and the customary law in the north .
 The Treaty of Augsburg of 1555 granted princes and cities the right to be Lutheran . The treaty also recognized the secularization of church property up to 1552 .
 Most European states were to some extent dynastic they were regarded as a family inheritance . European dynasties were considered to be dynastic .
 King Henry VIII of England claimed the throne of Ireland in 1541 . King James VI of Scotland inherited the English throne in 1603, uniting all three kingdoms under one monarch .
 In central Europe at the beginning of the 16th century, one branch of the Jagiellon dynasty ruled over Poland-Lithuania . Another branch ruled over Bohemia and Hungary .
 Hungary, one of the largest kingdoms of the late Middle Ages, was a union of Hungary, Croatia and parts of Bosnia . Hungary was one of Hungary's largest kingdoms .
 Hungarian Transylvania, Moldavia and Wallachia were ruled by local princes as tributaries of the sultan, whose direct rule extended to Buda and the central region of Hungary . The sultan ruled the region as a direct rule of the region .
 The ruling dynasties of Europe were all closely related to each other . This did not prevent the fighting of wars between them .
 Often described as ‘Wars of Magnificence’, these were pursued for glory and vindication of dynastic title, and were considered more admirable than ‘common wars’ fought for the annexation of territory or other forms of gain .
 The House of France and the Spanish House of Aragon laid claim to Naples in the south and to Lombardy and the duchy of Milan in the north . An example of this occurred in Italy .
 In the richest part of Italy, the struggle was more than one of inheritance . In the latter, the rich part of the country, it was more of inheritance than inheritance . The struggle is more than a struggle between the rich and poor .
 Francis I of France gained control of Milan in 1500 and lost it in 1512 . Charles V had to oppose this if his power in Italy were not to crumble . The French king lost control of the city in 1515 .
 War began in 1521 (the French evacuated Milan in 1522), and lasted intermittently in the peninsula until the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis in 1559 . The French and Italian armies were involved in the conflict .
 The Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 established a new international order . This established an international order which was to survive with modifications until 1648 . The treaty was the first of its kind in the world .
 Despite the disaster of the sack of Rome in 1527 by troops of Charles V, papal authority over Romagna was strengthened . Venetians agreed to evacuate Ravenna in 1530 after the sacking of Rome .
 Parma was acquired from Milan by Pope Julius II in 1512 . It was granted out as a duchy by Pope Paul III to his son Pierluigi Farnese in 1545 . Parma is now considered one of Italy's most important cities .
 Ivan's son, Vasili III, con timid wilH this policy of aggressive expansion . Vasili's son Vasili IV is now in charge of the country's largest city .
 An asteag was founded at Tomsk in I and by 1607 Turuchonsk an the Yenisei River had been reached . By 1607, Turuchonk had reached the Yoyan River, reaching the highest level of the river system .
 The river become the frontier of the empire in 1619, with another string of mop mop being established along it . The river became the frontier for the empire after it was established by 1619 .
 Ivan IV became the next grand duke in 1533 at the age of three . During his minority the boyar a vied with each other for control of the state . Ivan IV and Ivan IV were the first to become grand dukes of Russia in the 1500s .
 No further territorial expansion took place until after he was formally crowned as the first '""tsar” in 1547 .
 In 1552 a successful campaign was launched against the Tatar stronghold of Kazan . This was followed by the seizure of Astrakhan on the Caspian Sea in 1556 .
 Russian territory extended the entire length of the Volga, bisecting Tatar domains and dominating the peoples of the northern Caucasus and eastern Caspian . Russian territory now extended across the entire .
 The foundation in 1560 of a fortified post at Perm on the River Kama brought the Muscovites to within easy reach of the Urals . Trading in furs promised to he a great source of w ealth .
 From 1578 the Stroganovs were granted a vast tract of unexplored land by the tsar . They took the lead itt exploration and settlement beyond the Urals . The family of merchants were granted the land in 1578 .
 Lena River was reached in 1632. the Indigirka in 1639 and the Kolyma in 1644. The Lena River is the largest river in the world, reaching the Lena River .
 The explorer Dhezhnev reached the Amur River in 1648 and Khabarov got to Amur in 1649 . The two explorers reached the lie ring Strait and Amur river in the early 1649s .
 The Khamchatkn Peninsula was entered by Russian explorers in 1679 . These territorial advances were largely at the expense of the indigenous, often nomadic, peoples .
 Any resistance was effectively suppressed by punitive expeditions from the ostrogs . Any resistance from the Ostrogs were effectively suppressed .
 In the west, Russian ambitions were more circumscribed . Kl SSI: In the West, Russia's ambitions are more limited than in the west .
 In 1558, Ivan IV became embroiled in a devastating war of 25 years which ruined both Livonia and Estonia . The Russian armies were left prostrate by the end of the war .
 T he expansion of Russian rule into Europe and Asia was a process of exploration and discovery comparable with the contemporaneous exploration of the oceanic w f orld by western European peoples .
 Muscovy was one of many small principalities in northern Europe which paid tribute to the Tatars . By the end of the 18th century it had been at the heart of an empire that stretched from the Baltic Sea to the Bering Strait . The Tatars were one of the
 His death in 1584 unleashed a generation of instability culminating in the “Time of Troubles” period of political and social upheaval and foreign occupation . A national revolt led to the installation of a new dynasty, the Romanovs, in 1613 . In 1613, a
 Poland took advantage of Russia's internal problems to take back Smolensk and Chernigov in 1618 . At this time Russia’s main western enemy was Poland, which took back the cities .
 Sweden acquired Ingria and Carelia from Russia in 1617 . Another threat was the growing power of Sweden . Sweden acquired the region from Russia .
 Russia was able to take advantage of the Swedish invasion of Poland in the 1650s to conclude a treaty with the Ukrainian Cossacks and detach them from Poland .
 Between 1667 and 1689 Russia also regained Smolensk and Chernigov from Poland . Russia regained the cities from Poland in 1667 to 1689 .
 By the beginning of Peter the Great’s reign, Russia had tripled its territory in a century . By the end of the reign, the Russian empire had doubled its borders in 100 years .
 Sweden was defeated by Russia in the Battle of Poltava in 1709 . The outcome was formalized in 1721, when Sweden was forced to withdraw from Estonia and Livonia . Sweden was also forced to return to Russia of Ingria and Carelia after the battle .
 Peter's ambitious plans to overhaul the state and “Europeanize” Russia . Acquiring a port on the Baltic was one element of Peter’s ambitious plans . Peter: "Europeanize" Russia is one of Russia's most important states .
 The construction of a navy and the acquisition of a port on the Black Sea were among the priorities . So, too, was the construction of an army and a navy .
 He achieved the latter when he captured Azov in 1696, but he lost it again in 1711 during the Great Northern War . He also lost it during the Second Battle of the Crimean Peninsula .
 In order to compete with other western powers, Russia needed to industrialize . Russia needed industrialization in order to be competitive with western powers .
 A few ironworks had been set up by foreigners in the 1630s in the Tula and Moscow regions . Russia remained overwhelmingly peasant society and lagged far behind western Europe .
 Peter the Great operated an essentially mercantilist policy, patronizing certain commercial interests in order to encourage export trade . Peter's policy was essentially a mercantillist policy .
 As a result there was rapid growth of both mining and the armaments industry . But this “forced industrialization” had little impact on the living standards of the peasants .
 Many of these produced armaments, while others were mining and metallurgical plants in the Urals . Many of the mines and mines in Russia were in the Soviet Union .
 Conditions for the vast majority of Russian people continued to deteriorate, leading to mossive peasant rebellions which periodically convulsed Russia in 17th and 18th centuries .
 Gwtav introduced a number of tonslilulionoL legal and educational reforms before being killed in battle during the Thirty Years War . He was killed during the war .
 Russia and Denmark finally exhausted Swedish military strength . Denmark and Denmark were the only two countries to have exhausted Swedish forces .
 Treaties in 1719-70 handed firemen and Yerden to Hanover and Stettin to Prussia, and in 1721 the Treaty oT Nystadt conceded the loss of tmmia, Estonia and Ingr hr to Russia .
 In Scandinavia the Union of Kalmar, dating from 1397, joined together Denmark, Norway and Sweden-Finland in a loosely governed monarchy centred at Copenhagen . A t the beginning of the 16th century the Baltic region was still dominated by power blocks .
 All round the southern Baltic the alliance of free Hanseatic cities, such as Danzig and Luheek, controlled trade . The alliance of Hanseats cities controlled trade in the region .
 The largest country was Pdand-Lithuania, created in 1386 when the ruler of the vast Grand Duchy of Lithuania came to the Polish throne . The country was created in the 13th century when it was ruled by the Polish king .
 Economically, it was already in the process of becoming a major supplier of raw materials to the increasingly urban capitalist society of northwestern Europe .
 Poland was becoming a major supplier of grain, while furs and hemp from Novgorod and Muscovy, and timber and ores from Sweden, were already major elements in European trade and production . Poland became a major grain supplier in the 17th century .
 Control of the ports, tolls and waterways to western Europe was an increasingly important factor in tile politics of the Baltic region .
 In 1521 a Swedish nobleman, Gustav Vasa, led a successful revolution in Stockholm against the Danish king, thus ending the Kalmar Union . A new book, "Klt In the Baltic," is published by Klt in 1521 .
 Gustav Vasa became king in 1523, beginning a new period of Swedish independence and nationhood . Gustav Vassas was king of Sweden from 1523 to 1688 . Gustav's reign was the first of its kind in Sweden .
 In 1520s the Reformation hastened the disintegration of the Teutonic Order, while major determinant of Swedish policy though Denmark, the most powerful state in the region, opposed Swedish pretensions . In 1582 a treaty between Poland and Russia left most of Livonia in
 Denmark was still the leading Baltic power at the beginning of the 17th century . Control of the Sound was the only deep-water access to the Baltic .
 As a result of a war with Sweden in 1611-13, it succeeded in expelling the Swedes from their only port on the North Sea . It gained trading access to Livonia and gained trade access to the Livonia .
 Military intervention in northern Germany in 1625-29 was a disastrous failure and a severe blow to Danish power . Danish intervention was a major blow to the Danish empire .
 From 1603 Poland and Sweden fought for control of the great Baltic trading centres Riga, Dorpat and Reval . The rise and decline of Sweden was part of the rise and fall of Sweden .
 King Gustav li Adolf of Sweden succeeded in capturing Riga in 1621 and the whole of Livonia by 1625 . The following year he occupied most of the ports along the Prussian coast . The next year, 1625, he occupied the ports of Riga and Livonia .
 The war was only ended by the Truce of Alt mark in 1629, allowing Sweden to continue to milk the revenues of the Prussian ports . Sweden and Prussia were at odds for centuries .
 Sweden's growing ascendancy over Denmark was recognized in 1645 by the Treaty of Brdmscbm . 4th century Sweden was a {mail rounrry of just am a million people. Sweden was just over a million in size .
 Livonian lands became a prime object of competition between Poland, Muscovy, Sweden and Denmark . The Livonian Lands now became the subject of competition . Poland became a major rival in Muscovie and Musciovy .
 Gistev Adolf 1631 32 —► ImDskHidfPobidliSS-SB —► Campaign against Pdanrt 17025 —► Cainpoiyn against Russia 17 OS X Bette wirli dote S Siege North Sea ^NGtAN
 Denmark also conceded Bremen and Verden in the Treaty of Westphalia which also transferred western Pomerania to Sweden . The Treaty was also confirmed in the treaty which also gave Sweden western Pomersania .
 These treaties, however, did not entirely settle the issue of predominance . These treaties were not entirely settled .
 Sweden still needed to assure its control of the Prussian ports, and in 1655 King Charles X mounted an invasion of Poland that led to its collapse . The invasion led to the collapse of the country .
 1660 marks the summit of Swedish imperial power based on a military system, both at land and sea, that made Sweden the envy of Europe . The year 1660 is the year of the greatest year in history, when Sweden was the most powerful in Europe .
 There were, however, a number of factors that threatened to weaken Sweden . Sweden's economy has been hit hard by austerity measures in recent years .
 The population was only a little over a million, and the constitution was liable to sudden fluctuations between limited and absolute monarchy . The constitution was also liable to fluctuate from absolute monarchy to limited monarchy .
 The possessions in northern Germany were extremely vulnerable and often lost during wars, only to be retained by diplomatic manoeuvres .
 Poland never recovered from the Swedish occupation of 1655-58 . In 1667 it lost the eastern Ukraine and Smolensk to Russia .
 Thereafter, Poland became increasingly a plaything of surrounding powers . Poland's rise in power was due to the rise of the Polish Republic .
 By 1717 Peter the Great of Russia had turned it into a Russian protectorate . It was a major theatre of the Great Northern War of 1700-21 .
 A Swedish military power was based on a national standing army established after 1544 by Gustav I . This was supplemented by mercenaries when a larger force was needed for foreign conquest . A Swedish standing army was formed in 1544 .
 In the early 17th century the army was further reformed by Gustav II Adolf, paving the way for Swedish success in the Thirty Years War and beyond . The army was also reformed in the early 16th century by Gustav I Adolf .
 Poland was carved up in the course of three partitions in 1773,1793 and 1795 between Russia, Austria and Prussia . After a brief period as a Russian protectorate, Poland became a Polish protectorate .
 Poland gained crmlral of ihe tourland lerritDry of the Livonian Order and in 1618 regained port of the Smolensk region . Poland gained the port of Smolenk region in 1616 . Poland regained port in 1617 .
 Swedish invasions in the 165CH and renewed war with Russia ended in 1667 . Lerritory was last re-occupied by Swedish forces in 1666 .
 Hamburg Emperor Otaris Y presided over a vast cnllectia n of territories . The Hamburg Emperor faced formidable enemies Valoij Frame, the Ottoman Empire and various alliances of German princes .
 In 1556 r after Charles's abdication, the empire was divided in two, with Ferdinand I ruling the Austrian domains and Philip II inheriting his father's Spanish lands . Ferdinand I ruled Austria and Ferdinand II inherited Philip II's lands .
 I n 1490 the Habshurg dynasty was one of a number of ancient dynasties that were in the process of creating major princely states .
 The military' and diplomatic system needed to rule and defend them in the emperor’s name was formidable by the standards of the age. ‘The military’
 In some ways it is a misnomer to talk about a Habshurg ‘'empire” at this time, for Charles ruled his many territories largely through rights of inheritance and they all maintained their separate constitutions .
 Charles was the grandson of Maximilian I of the House of Habsburg . He ruled over domains centred on Austria since the 13th century . The extent of II vrsbi rc territories was the extent of the IIvrsbi territories .
 Maximilian was Holy Roman Emperor from 1493 to 1519 . He gained control of what was left of the territories of the extremely wealthy Valois dukes of Burgundy . He was married to the duke of the Burgundy dukes .
 An alliance was formed with tile Genoese Republic in 1528; defeat of French expeditions to Milan and Naples . French-backed Florentine Republic was overthrown in 1530 . Hahsburg predominance in Italy sealed by the overthrow of Florentines Republic .
 Charles was elected Holy Roman Emperor in 1519 . He brought formal prestige as the first prince of Christendom but little more than that .
 The King of France regarded himself as the equivalent of the emperor in his own kingdom and recognized no superior . The King was not the emperor of France, but he was the equivalent to the emperor .
 Charles ruled more directly as Archduke of the Netherlands and of Austria . Control of the eastern llabsburg lands centred on Vienna was devolved to his brother Ferdinand, who was elected heir to the imperial throne .
 In both the Mediterranean and central Europe Charles directly confronted the power of the Ottoman Empire . Charles confronted the growing threat of the Empire in the Mediterranean, central Europe .
 Ottomans had occupied Rhodes in 1522 and went on to defeat the Hungarian army in 1526 . The Ottoman Empire occupied Rhodes and defeated the Hungarian forces in 1524 . The Ottoman army was defeated by the Hungarians in 1525 .
 Vienna withstood a major siege in 1529 and a threat of one in 1532 . The Ottoman threat was only held at bay by the combined dynastic and imperial power of the llabsburgs . In the western Mediterranean Charles sought, throvrgh the conquest of Tunis in 15
 Charles reached the height of power at the Battle of Muhlberg in 1547 when he managed to crush the forces of the Protestant rulers of liesse and Saxony . He then tried to reverse many of the religious and political developments in Germany since the 1520s .
 In 1552 the rebellion of the League of Princes in Germany allied to Henry |] of France forced him to accept that the inheritance was too large to be ruled by one man . On his abdication in 1556 the empire was divided between his son, Philip II T who
 When King Louis 11 of Hungary was killed at Mohacs in 1526, Ferdinand was elected to the Bohemian and Hungarian thrones by the magnates . The magnates saw him as the best guarantor of their safety against the Ottoman Turks .
 With the weakening of the Ottoman Turks in the 17th century', the dynasty was able to begin the piecemeal reconquest of Hungary . Largely complete by the end of the century, this established the Habsburgs as major dynastic power of central Europe .
 Power was transmitted along a series of military routes leading from Spain to the Low Countries known collectively as the “Spanish Road" The routes were challenged in the late 16th century by rebels in the Low . Countries .
 Spain proved unable to maintain control of the northern provinces of the Netherlands and agreed a temporary truce in 1609 . Ultimately, Spain was unable to keep control of northern provinces .
 The axis of power between Madrid and Vienna remained vital to the Spanish system . It was reinforced as the Habsburgs in central Europe came under pressure from rebellious nobles and Protestants .
 The last phase of the Spanish military system in western Europe showed that it was remarkably resilient in the face of massive setbacks such as the rebelj lions in Portugal and Catalonia in 1640 . Nevertheless, the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 forced the recognition of the independence of the United
 For the rest of the 17th century', 8pain and its dependencies were constantly on the defensive . 8pain was the most successful period of its kind in the world .
 Philip II fated serious opposition from (he nobility from 1565 wA a scute revolt in Holfortd from 1572 . Philip II, fated . opposition from . nobility from . 1565 to 1572. Philip II . . Fated serious . opposition .
 Outing ihe 16lh ond 17 lb con furies the Austrian Habsburgs extended lhair territory arms Hungary and along the Danube as far east as Troitsyfvanio, However, in 1682 ihe Ottomans claimed Hungary os a v
 The subsequent twomonth siege of the tity hi 1683 was only lifted when a Polish army attacked (he Ottoman forces and sent them into retreat) The siege was lifted when an Ottoman army attacked . The subsequent siege of 1683 only lifted after a Polish attack .
 Hie Habsburgs eventually regained Hungary from the Ottomans under the Treaty of Cortewit; in 1692 . In 1692, they regained Hungary under the treaty of the Treaty .
 Calvinism became dominant during the 16th century . The Anglican Church under Elizabeth I was Cohinisl with aa episcopal government .
 Colvinisin was adopted in Transylvania (in Hungary) and in Poland so mony nobles became Praleslanl . Special provisions for iheir toleralion had to be agreed in 1569-71 .
 T he Reformation is commonly associated with an outraged response to the corruption of the Church in the late 15th and early 16th centuries . In fact* the corruption had come under attack before, in fact*
 Religious revivalism swept across Europe and sought an increased rule for the laity in religious life . What was new was the emergence of a powerful force of religious revivalism .
 Protestant Reformation traditionally dated from 31 October 1517 . Martin Luther's Ninety-Five Theses against indulgences were pasted on the door of the castle church at Wit ten burg in Saxony . The impact of the Reformation on Li thehamsm can be traced back
 Luther's Theses provoked a hostile reaction from the upper hierarchy of the Church . Luther’s Theses and other writings received the attention of a wider publie than might otherwise have been the ease of the ease .
 His attack on financial abuses within the Church found support among a broad range of the laity . His emphasis on the spiritual nature of Christianity and the teachings of the gospel, found support .
 Before 1517 reform of the Church had been seen as a legitimate objective; now Luther’s call for 14 reformation*' was regarded as a fundamental threat to both the Church and the Holy Roman Empire . Luther‘s call to 14 reform*' in 1517 was
 Luther was excommunicated in 1521 after denying the primacy of the Pope . Later that year he was placed under an imperial ban . Luther denied the Pope's primacy . Luther was also placed under imperial ban by the Roman Empire .
 A number of German princes broke with Rome and adopted Lutheranism . They gained political control over the Church in their own territories as a result .
 League of Protestant estates including Hesse, Saxony, Wurttemberg, Palatinate and several imperial cities was formed at Schmalkalden . This was met with fierce opposition from Charles V at the Augsburg Reichstag in 1530, and in response a
 It was not until 1555 that Charles V was forced to concede the Peace of Augsburg, granting full rights to the secular estates of the Empire to adopt Lutheran reform . Charles V finally conceded the peace in 1555, but it was only 1555 .
 The reform movement spread rapidly but for many it was the ideas of local reformers that mattered most . Reformers in the 1930s and '60s were inspired by local leaders . The movement was inspired by the work of a local reformer .
 By the end of the 1520s, a split between the Lutheran Reformation and the radical churches was clear .
 Thomas Miintzer encouraged a more radical view that was to culminate in the ‘Kingdom of Zion’ of the Anabaptists at Munster . Huldreich Zwingli led a reformation which differed from Lutheranism over the sacrament of Communion .
 Protestantism in Switzerland was revived by Calvin, a humanist and lawyer born in northern France . Zwingli died in battle in 1531, but Calvin revived the faith in Switzerland .
 Calvin, who controlled the Genevan church by 1541, gave the French-speaking world a coherent doctrine as well as an effective organization . Calvin was the leader of the Geneva church .
 He proved to be the most significant influence on the emergence of the Reformation in France from the 1540s onwards . He sent out a network of preachers to the main French cities .
 By 1557 an underground church was in existence and in 1559 declared itself openly . In 1559 it declared itself to be an openly religious church .
 In Spain and Italy, the internal reform of the Catholic Church was pushed forward by the foundation of many new religious orders devoted to charitable and evangelical work in the lay world . The Society of Jesus founded by Ignatius Loyola in 1534 .
 Within the Catholic Church as whole, the establishment of the means to resist Protestantism was a priority . Within the . Catholic Church, the . establishment of . the means . to resist Protestants was a . priority .
 General Council of Trent held between 1545 and 1563 . Restated theological doctrine in a way which precluded reunion with Protestants . Decrees aimed at reforming clergy and church organization were issued .
 The pronouncements of the Council of Trent were not immediately translated into action . The Council signalled that the Catholic Church was to become an evangelical movement, seeking to win converts among heretics in Europe and the ‘pagans’ of the overseas world .
 The Catholic Church and absolute monarchs had the power, through patronage, to win back disaffected nobles to the Roman Catholic faith . Crucial in this process was the growing identification between the Church and monarchs .
 In France, although the Jesuits were at first not allowed to preach, a resurgence of Catholic piety and fundamentalism eventually put a limit to any further expansion of Protestantism .
 Protestants extracted from the French crown a lasting guarantee of religious toleration in the Edict of Nantes . But this in effect confirmed their minority status in France .
 When their guaranteed strongholds were removed by the Crown in the 1620s, they were reduced to a position of sufferance . The Crown removed them from a guaranteed position of power in 1616 .
 In 1685 the Edict was revoked and around 200,000 Protestants were forced to convert to Catholicism or flee the country . Around 200,00 Protestants were made to convert or flee to Catholicism .
 Calvinist minority seized power in Holland and Zeeland in 1572 but had to fight a bitter and prolonged war with Spain which was to last until 1648 . In the Netherlands Calvinists had to face a long-lasting and bitter conflict with Spain .
 By the end of the war in 1648, Roman Catholicism had been re-established in France, Poland, Hungary and Bohemia . The Treaty of Westphalia recognized a new order in Europe .
 Religious pluralism was reluctantly accepted between, if not within, within, states . However, there was no return to religious war and, to some extent, religious pluralism .
 The inner ""forest"" cantons were hostile to Zwingli and feared the power of Zurich where he was based . The inner "forest" cantons of Zurich were also hostile .
 After his death in 1531 Bern took up the military leadership of Protestantism, giving its protection to Geneva . Geneva, although not technically part of the Swiss Confederation, became the centre of Swiss Protestant doctrine .
 Crucial to its survival, however, was the support of a very large minority of the nobility . Crucial . to the survival of the . nobility, however .
 Its greatest concentration was eventually in a ""crescent"" stretching from Dauphine in the east to Poitou in the west . The greatest concentration of the "crescent" was in a 'crescent' stretching from the east .
 Life was precarious for Protestants north of the Loire after the St Bartholomew's Day Massacre in August 1572 . This was largely a result of the course of the French Wars of Religion which rendered life precarious .
 Oliver Cromwell came to prominence as a military leader during the Civil War of 1642-48 between supporters of the king and of Parliament . Cromwell was a key figure in the war of the year 1642 and 48 . He was the leader of the army during the war between supporters
 It is in fort the case that there were plague epidemics in Europe and China in (be 1640s as well as parallel political upheavals)
 The growth of armies and of military technology in this period {pagvs 158—59) could only be achieved through an increase in taxation that was so large as to challenge the basis on which states had been governed .
 Spain intervened in Germany on behalf of the Austrian Habsburg emperor in 161* and then renewed its conflict with the Dutch in Ib21 . Spain became committed to massive military expenditure which devastated its finances .
 Castile, which had undergone a loss of population since the 1590s, found the burden increasingly difficult to bear . Castile's population had gone from a population loss to a loss in the 1580s .
 Portugal, Aragon, Catalonia and Naples bore a greater share of the tax burden . The hitherto privileged regions of Portugal and Aragon bore greater burden of tax .
 In France -governed by Cardinal Kiel id tcu from 1624 - the steadily increasing tax burden was accompanied by an increase in royal tax officialdom at the expense of local machinery of voting taxes .
 The direct costs of billeting and supplying the army were borne by the civil population with increasing reluctance . In addition to the massive increases in direet (axes from 1633 (when France formally entered the war against Spain and the Habs burgs)
 From around 1630 numerous local revolts broke out, often supported by regional notables resentful at the infringements of their privileges by the Crown . In 1636-37 the Crown was faced by a large-scale rebellion in the southwest which brought together under the name of Croqu
 In 1639 the Nn-Pied$ rebelled against the extension of the full salt tax regime to that area . In lower Normandy in 1639, the N.N.Pied# rebelled .
 Cardinal Mazarin succeeded Richelieu as Chief Minister in 1643 and continued the same policies of high taxes and prolonged war against Spain, even after the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648 .
 Attempts of Charles l to impose his religious policies on the Scots exposed the weakness at the core of the Stuart monarchy . The result was a confused period of civil war known as the Frond vs. which paralysed French policy until 1653 .
 Charles attempted to govern and raise revenues without Parliament throughout the 1630s . But he was confronted by a tax-payers' revolt and by the fact that he could not raise an army without some form of parliamentary gram . Charles tried to govern without Parliament but was confronted with a revolt and
 The summoning of Parliament in 1640 triggered a sequence of events that imposed shackles on the king’s powers . It then provoked him to try a military solution . The summons of Parliament was a series of events which triggered a chain of events .
 The resulting civil war led to the king’s execution and the proclamation of a republic in 1649 . Civil war ended with the death of the king, who was executed by the king's execution .
 Opposition in Ireland and Scotland was crushed in 1649-50 by the New Model Army under Oliver Cromwell . Opposition was crushed by Cromwell's New Model army under Cromwell under the reign of 1649 .
 In the 1620s and 1630s large-scale peasant revolts broke out in the Alpine territories of the Austrian Habsburgs . Further east, Cossack rebellions Hared up in the Polish Commonwealth in the 1640s, 1650s and in Russia in
 Some modem historians have discerned a systematic ""general crisis” in which the political upheavals of the in id-17 th century were a symptom of profound economic transformation . Some of the  political disparadesions were the result of profound economic trans
 The trend throughout Europe after 1660 was towards political stability . In contrast, the trend in 1660 Europe was towards stability .
 Peasant revolts continued in France until the 1670s . Part 3: The establishment of stability was achieved in France .
 Despite severe economic problems and the massive growth of armed forces to enable the annexation of territory, these revolts did not seriously threaten the state . However, despite the . continuation of severe economic . problems, the . continued economic problems . did not threaten the . state .
 After Mazarin’s death in 1661 Louis XIV assumed personal rule, which deflected the discontent of the nobility and assuaged the conflicts between government and officialdom .
 Thereafter he ruled as absolute monarch with the aid of a centralized bureaucratic government a pattern which was to continue until 1789 . The pattern of royal rule was similar to that of the late 17th century .
 Louis was able to impose religious uniformity in 1685 . Without any significant opposition, he imposed it without significant opposition .
 The doctrine of ‘absolute power’, though not new, became the keynote for many rulers eager to imitate the splendours of Louis’ court at Versailles .
 In east-central Europe the Hohenzollerns rulers of Brandenburg and Prussia gradually increased their power . Elector Frederick William I came to an agreement with the nobility, under which his military powers were extended in return for reinforcement of their controls over their tenantry .
 The defeat of the monarchy led to the emergence of oligarchic parliamentary systems . Britain from 1689, the United Provinces from 1702, Sweden from 1721 . Elsewhere in Europe, the defeat of Britain led to a parliamentary system .
 In Spain, the Bourbon dynasty, confirmed by the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713, imposed a centralized government on the French model . Spain's central government was established by the French in 1713 .
 Although major wars continued to be endemic and commercial rivalry both in Europe and overseas was fierce, governments were far more securely anchored than in the 17th century .
 Religious uniformity, while still formally insisted on, was in practice no longer so vital . Religious uniform was still formal insisted on but was no longer necessary .
 A Europe in which one or other dynastic state threatened to dominate the rest had been replaced by a ‘concert of Europe’ of roughly balanced powers that was to last until the revolutionary period in the 1790s . The concert of Europe was to have lasted until the revolution in
 The high point of his achievements came in 1684 when his acquisition of Luxembourg was confirmed by the Treaty of Regensburg . He acquired Luxembourg during a war with Spain and the Empire .
 From 1685 the threat he posed to other powers led to a series of alliances being formed against him . He posed a threat to the world from 1685 to 1688 .
 Prussia was founded in 1525 out of the remaining lands of the Teutonic Knights . The duchy of Prussia passed to the Hohenzollern electors of Brandenburg in 1618 . Prussia is now the largest country in Europe .
 Brandenburg—Prussia did well out of the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 and the Northern War to extend its territories . Under Elector Frederick William I , Brandenburg-Prussia extended its territories in the 16th century .
 European warfare was massively transformed in scale and complexity in the 15th and l Si It centuries . It has been argued that the transformation amounted to a “military revolution"" led by the Swedes and the Dutch in the decades around 1600 .
 The driving force behind military change was the development of a highly competitive state structure, both regionally and across Europe . However, this view underestimates the role of France and Spain, and the process of military change is now seen as one that was evolutionary rat iter than revolutionary .
 Countries which had not invested in major military reorganization by the 17th century such as Poland were seriously disadvantaged . Poland's military expenditure was high in those countries with military expenditure high .
 In addition there were several civil wars involving a degree of ideological or religious dispute, such as the French Wars of Religion I1562-98) and the English Civil War 11642-48). Art illery amt siege warfare was made possible by a number of crucial technical innovations .
 In mid-15th-century France, more effective, snialler-calibre bronze cannons replaced the existing, unreliable wrought-iron version . The growing sophistication of artillery in the 15th century altered the terms of war .
 Charles VII VIIIs invasion of Italy in 1494 was his deployment of the formidable French royal artillery . Charles VII is known for his use of the French artillery during his invasion of the Italian kingdom .
 Bronze, however, was expensive, and the next important development was the manufacture of reliable cast-iron guns in England during the 1540s .
 Cast-iron guns were three or four times cheaper than their bronze counterparts . Cast iron cannon foundries of Europe were unable to compete until the next century .
 Italy, France and 8 pa in therefore embarked on highly expensive programmes of refnrtification to render fortresses and cities impregnable to artillery bombardment . The major powers Italy, . France and . France therefore embarked upon highly expensive . programmes .
 As a consequence of these developments in siege warfare, wars of rapid movement of the kind embarked upon by the English in 14th-century France became unthinkable . War of siege warfare in France became impossible as a result .
 Artillery had its place on the battlefield, but because of difficulties in using it tactically, it was slow to gain dominance . Artillery has its place in the battlefield but struggled to achieve dominance .
 Field artillery and handguns inflicted severe casualties on pike squares . At Ravenna , Marignano and Bicocca, field artillery and . handguns inflicted . severe casualties . at Ravenna . Field artillery inflicted severe . casualties .
 To combat this, large mixed infantry formations were used, armed partly with pikes and partly with musets . Mixed infantry formations used to combat the problem .
 Heavy cavalry in general was overhauled to make use of firearms, most notably among the German reiters . Despite these developments, heavy cavalry did not disappear .
 Commanders now sought to organize infantry and cavalry more effectively . Commanders were now trying to organize their troops more effectively.
 It was still difficult to manoeuvre large groups of men on the battlefield, especially since the main battles consisted of vast squares of infantrymen . However, it is still difficult for large groups to maneuver large groups .
 The necessity of increasing the rate of fire of handguns led to the development of ‘volley fire’ in the Dutch armies in the 1590s . The infantry was laid out in long lines, firing rank after rank, firing ranks .
 Battles took place over larger areas and involved greater numbers of soldiers . All these changes meant that battles took place in larger areas .
 In 1525, at Pavia, the French king’s army of 28,000 men was defeated by a Habsburg army of 20,000 . In 1709, at Malplaquet, a French army of 76,000 faced an Allied army of 105,
 The maximum number sustainable for a whole campaign in the mid-16th century seems to have been about 50,000 . By 1700, by 1700 the number was around 200,000 and by 1710 France could sustain a total military establishment of 310,000 men .
 Germany became a battleground in which all the military powers tested their strength . The armies frequently plundered towns, villages and farms for supplies, adding to the devastation .
 The Holy Roman Emperor's power was at its height in 1629 but thereafter began to collapse . He was at the height of 1629 and his power began to crumble .
 During the 16th century foreign mercenaries frequently outnumbered national subjects in the armies of the kings of France and Spain . The composition of armies SfMhisli Army at Fhnfen 1575 .
 The Italians had been the great soldiers of fortune in the 15th century . They were supplanted by the Swiss and then by Germans from the Rhineland and Westphalia .
 Scots were particularly active in Germany during the Thirty Years War . English mercenaries served in the Netherlands in the later 16th century .
 These developments were international in character although their global impact was unevenly distributed . They were international developments that had a global impact on the world .
 They had a common origin in the unparalleled expansion of European influence economic, political, demographic and cultural throughout the world . They were born in France, Italy and Germany .
 The modern world* was based largely on Europe’s economic and technological ascendancy . This process, which slowly hut surely transformed the character of global civilization, forged the modern world*.
 By the mid-18th century European commercial primacy was already established . European lead in manufacturing was apparent only in some areas, such as armaments, ships and books .
 In the later 18th and early 19th centuries there was a new wave of economic growth and development, first in Britain and then in northwest Europe . In the 18th, 19th and 20th century there was an economic boom in the region .
 During the 19th century, industrialization spread first to northwestern Europe and the eastern states of the United States . Later known as the “Industrial Revolution"", the changes led to such a rapid increase in manufacturing that by the middle of the 19 century Britain was described as “
 World trade trehled between 1870 and 1914 and led to an increase in mass manufacturing . This led to a huge increase in world trade and mass manufacturing in modern times .
 By 1900 both the United States and Germany surpassed Britain in some areas of production, such as that of iron and steel . Despite this, Britain remained the leading International trader and investor, with London the centre of the world capital market and of the international gold standard .
 The majority of the population even in developed countries such as the United States and France still lived and worked in rural areas, much as their forebears had done . Elsewhere, the majority of rural areas still live and worked .
 Global trade, industrialization and urbanization were still relatively undeveloped in 1914 . Western innovations had already transformed many aspects of life throughout the world .
 Steam power provided energy not only for factories but also for railways and ocean-going ships . The telegraph and later the telephone, along with the telegraph, reduced the time and cost of long-distance transport and communications .
 French Revolution failed in both its Jacobin and Napoleonic forms and was followed, after 1815, by a period of reaction in Europe, led by the autocratic rulers of Russia, Austria and Prussia . His optimism was premature, however, for the French Revolution .
 Liberalism led to revolutions in France and Belgium in 1830 and to reforms in other countries such as Britain . This did not, however, prevent the growth of Liberalism .
 In 1848 there were further revolutions in France and Germany which, although not entirely successful, led to the democratization of political institutions in western Europe . The revolutions in Germany and France led to a series of revolutions in Europe .
 By the early 20th century all European states, including Russia, had representative assemblies, most of which were elected by a w ide adult male suffrage . Most of Europe's representative assemblies were held by adult male voters .
 In the United States and the British dominions most white men and some women could vote, but not the nonEuropean ethnic groups . Women were still generally excluded from the franchise, but this restriction was being challenged and undermined .
 In most of the world non-democratic forms of government prevailed . In both the Middle and the Far East, dynastic rulers with autocratic powers flourished until the second decade of the 20th century .
 Native inhabitants were generally not allowed any direct voice in government . In the Asian, African and Caribbean colonics of the European powers, the native inhabitants were not allowed a direct voice .
 Bismarck was the dominant political figure in late 19th-century Europe . He remained Chancellor of Germany only as long as he retained the support of the kaiser . France was the only major European power to become a republic .
 The importance of hereditary dynasties in the European state system was illustrated when the murder of the Austrian archduke, Franz Ferdinand, at Sarajevo in 1914 precipitated the First World War . The European revolutions of 1048, sparked off by the overthrow of King Louis Philippe
 All independent countries in the Americas embraced republicanism during the 19th century . The franchise was usually extremely limited and elections were often suspended . In the long l l l. l lipped they encouraged liberalization and democratization af many European constitutions .
 By 1914 much of Europe was ruled by elected governments, although outside France and Portugal monarchs still acted as heads of state . By 1914, Europe had become more democratic and democratic .
 Ihe extent to which they actually exercised power varied from country to country, as did the proportion af rifaens entitled to vote . The extent of the power exercised by the rifaans varied from countries to countries .
 Those areas of Ask» and Africa not under European control or influence were ruled by autocratic monarchs . The region was ruled by monarchs who ruled it out of control .
 The Balkan slates fought off colonial rule and established their independence . Smaller cnnflich arose from Belgium, Greece, Hungary Italy and Belgium .
 The unsuccessful attempt by ihe ouinumbered Confederate to storm ifie Unionisls during the Battle of Gettysburg in July 1863 is generally considered to he the turning point of the war .
 Europe was the most powerful region in the world both in economic and military terms . Europe was seldom united cither at the national or international level .
 The growth of nationalist sentiment encouraged the emergence of ‘nation-states’ such as Germany and Italy . Several great powers Russia, Austria and the United Kingdom — were composed of different ethnic groups whose antipathies to each other were increased .
 Nationalism and territorial ambition led many European countries to attack one another . Nationalism led many nations to attack each other in Europe .
 The Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71 generated hundreds of thousands of casualties and the Paris Commune, in which socialists briefly seized power . The late 19th century saw the emergence of new ideologies of egalitarianism and class conflict Marxism, syndicalism and anarchism .
 Europe was a divided continent long before the First World War exacerbated its problems . Europe was divided before the war, with many of its problems exacerbated by the conflict .
 France and Spain helped the American colonists gain their independence from Britain . Britain captured many French, Spanish and Dutch colonies during its struggle with Napoleon .
 The period 1770-1914 has been described as the “Age of European Imperialism” because it was characterized by a rapid expansion in European influence over the rest of the world .
 At no time between 1770 and 1914 was most of the world under direct European control . However, at no time during this period of European rule was under direct control .
 In the Americas European colonial rule was confined to the periphery of the Americas . In the Middle East and Asia important indigenous states survived despite the expansion of European influence .
 The extensive Manchu Qjng Empire remained largely intact until the second decade of the 20th century . The extensive Empire was largely intact in the early 20th Century .
 Japan acquired a maritime empire and rapidly developed its manufactures and foreign trade with the help of Western technology . The country's maritime empire was founded by Japan in 1903 .
 Other Asian rulers, such as the shahs of Persia and the kings of Siam, kept their independence by playing off European rivals against each other .
 Control of half the subcontinent was shared with native maharajahs . Even in India regarded by the British as the most valuable part of their empire .
 In Africa most of the interior remained beyond direct European control until the late 19th century . The interior of Africa was largely beyond direct control of the continent .
 Some native African states inflicted defeat on European armies as the Zulus did at Isandhlwana in 1879, the Mahdists at Khartoum in 1885 and the Ethiopians at Adowa in 1896 . Furthermore, some native African nations inflicted defeat against European armies .
 Most European colonies were of minor economic importance to their mother countries, although there were some notable exceptions . Most of the colonies were not of economic significance to the mother countries .
 Few colonies outside North America attracted large numbers of European settlers, except Australia, where the initial settlements were established with the aid of transported convicts . Australia was the first colony to establish colonies in North America .
 Very few Europeans settled in equatorial Africa or Asia, and even India attracted only a few thousand long-term British residents .
 In the 19th century, the distribution of the world’s population changed considerably . The population in the world has changed considerably in the last century .
 Asia remained far more populous than any other continent, but the population of Europe increased rapidly . North America exploded largely as a result of European migration . Europe's population increased rapidly, while North America's population exploded largely due to migration .
 The expansion of the European empires in Africa and Asia facilitated both Asian and European migration . The African slave trade continued to brazil and Cuba until the late 19th century .
 The great majority of people who left Europe more than 30 million over the period migrated to the U.S. The majority of those who left left Europe over 30 million left the United States .
 Americans were proud that they had left the restrictions and conflicts of the "Old World" for the opportunities and advantages of the “New World” and supported the isolationist policy of the United States government . Americans, although they often retained some aspects of their European heritage, were proud
 The combination of a low tax burden with rapid westward expansion and industrialization gave the majority of white Americans a very high standard of living . White Americans were able to live with a low standard of life .
 By the late 19th century the U.S. was the richest nation in the world . Its military power and international status were still a 1 1 vely undeveloped .
 The worldwide success of the European peoples encouraged them to believe in their own superiority . But it also exposed them to other cultures which subtly altered their own civilization . Japanese art, for example, inspired French and Dutch painters and British designers . Hinduism prompted the fashionable cult of theosophy
 In North America, popular music was influenced by African-American blues and jazz . Popular music in the U.S. influenced by the blues, jazz and other blues .
 Roman Catholicism became the main religion of the native peoples in Latin America . It was obliged to make compromises with local practices and beliefs . Roman Catholicism was the religion of native peoples .
 Outside the Americas European Christianity had little success in converting other ethnic and religious groups . Islam, for example, remained dominant in the Middle East and much of South and Southeast Asia, while Hinduism remained the religion of the majority in India . The Chinese and the Japanese largely remained loyal to their
 The vast majority of the world's ethnic groups remained attached to their own indigenous traditions and had little knowledge of other languages or cultures . Throughout the period the vast . majority of . the world remained attached . to their indigenous traditions .
 Even in 1914 European influence on the world was still limited and undeveloped in many respects . European influence in Europe was still very limited and undiveloped .
 The largest European transcontinental empires those of Britain and France did not reach their apogee until after the First World War . European cultural influence only reached its zenith in the later 20th century, by which time it had been subsumed in a wider “Westernization�
 Many of the won OLiistde Europe were feughr by European powers, or by people of European origin . A Many of Europe's greatest powers were European powers .
 In Latin America, there was a sequence af wars of liberation, as the Spanish colonial elites staged successful revolutions against rule from Spain .
 T he American Revolution or War of Independence gave birth to a new nation, die United States of America . The American Revolution was born in 17th century .
 Before 1763 the colonists, with their own colonial legislatures, had enjoyed a large measure of self-government . They had rarely objected to their membership of the British Empire .
 Changes to British policy' after 1763 created a sense of common grievance among colonies .
 The British government took steps to manage its North American empire more effectively . In order to police this vast area and to reduce substantial wartime debt, the British government managed to manage it better .
 Having no representation in the British parliament, the colonists viewed these measures as an attempt to bypass the colonial assemblies . The colonists responded by boycotting British goods .
 Committees of Correspondence were organized throughout the Thirteen Colonies to publicize American grievances . Most of these taxes were repealed in 1770, but most were publicized in 1768 .
 Between 1700 and 1770 the etanomir structure of the American colonies became increasingly diversified and wptihtkaied as the population increased sixfold la some 1,500,000 . The population of the U.S. colonies rose sixfold between 1770 and 17
 Manufacturing developed on a significant scale and there was a dramatic growth af trade, not only with the mother country and tbe British West Indies but aba illegally wilb the Ftatch West Indies and Europe .
 In response to the Ten Act of 1773, a symbolic ""tea party"" was held when protestors dumped incoming tea into Boston harbour rather than pay another ‘unjust"" lax .
 Britain passed the Coercive Acts of 1774 which closed Boston harbour and imposed a form of martial law . Feeling the need to enforce its authority, the Act was passed by the government .
 Meeting in Philadelphia in 1774, the First Continental Congress asserted tile right to “no taxation without representation” and denounced these new British laws as violations of American rights . Meeting in Pennsylvania, the Congress denounced the new British law .
 When Britain made it clear that the colonies must either submit to its rule or be crushed, the movement for full American independence began . The Restraining Act, 1775, was the act that made colonies submit to the British rule .
 War broke out when British troops clashed with the colonial militia at Lexington and Concord in April 1775 . British troops and colonial militia clashed with colonial militia .
 The colonists faced the full might of the British Empire . The colonists were deeply divided about what they were fighting for .
 Britain hail the greatest navy and the best-equipped army in the world . But the small size of the British army in America is evidence that Britain did not initially take the American threat seriously .
 The Americans had more than enough manpower to defend themselves, and in most battles they outnumbered British troops . The Americans, however, with militiamen and volunteers, were outnumbered by the British .
 Much of the fighting, especially in the south, took the form of guerrilla warfare . American militiamen, aided by the civilian population, were much more adept than the British regular troops .
 They had the advantage of fighting on their own territory and, unlike the British, had easy access to supplies . Unlike the British they were fighting on the own territory . The British were fighting in the early stages of the conflict .
 By the wars end America had also won the support of Britain’s enemies France, Spain and Holland .
 On 4 July 1776 the Second Continental Congress adopted Thomas JePerson’s Declaration of Independence . Part 4 31 if Paro tid if you want to know if you have a clue about the Declaration .
 This document furnished the moral and philosophical justification for the rebellion . It argues that governments are formed in order to secure the “self-evident"" truth (if the right of each individual to “life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness" is the truth .
 The Declaration asserted the colonists 1 independence from Britain and effectively cut all ties with the mother country . Grounded in the notion that ""all men are created equal"
 The first phase was / mainly located in New England but culminated in the American failure to capture Quebec in December 1775, thus enabling the British to retain Canada . The British were able to keep Canada .
 The American blockade at Saratoga proved to be a major turning point in the war . France entered the war on America's side, contributing badly needed aid and troops .
 Naval warfare now assumed greater importance, with Frenclt/American and British ships fighting for control of the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea .
 Spain declared war against Britain in June 1779, followed by Holland in 1780 . Holland declared war on Britain in 1779 and declared war in 1781 .
 In September 1781 the French fleet drove the British navy from Chesapeake Bay, preparing the way for the British surrender at Yorktown . Occasional fighting continued for over a year, hut a new British cabinet decided to open peace negotiations .
 The Treaty of Paris recognized the new republic and established generous boundaries from the Atlantic Coast to the Mississippi . The treaty established generous borders from the Great Lakes and Canada to the 31st parallel .
 The battbfroiils of the Ameficon Wor of Independent* siretdied from Quebec in ihe north in Florida in the south, and from the Allonlic caasl as for west as west as whal is southwestern Illinois . The Revolution was A
 Ang* 9^ S<W & 3,93 ffopnfrlf j Limoges SAVOY_ ArtKiani „ a 93 5a rdin«in> 9.93 ©• J JW R«v o/ Bifivay Spanish""
 French royalist armies, backed by Austria and Prussia, gathered on France’s borders . Tension between the moderates and anti-royalists grew as French royalists gathered .
 A new National Convention elected by universal male suffrage, declared France a republic . France was declared a republic by a National Convention . France became a republic in 1903 .
 Anti-revolutionary uprisings, presence on French soil of enemy armies and continuing economic problems led to a sense of national emergency . France was in a state of emergency in the 1930s .
 The Assembly appointed a Committee of Public Safety, dominated by the extremist Jacobins and led by Robespierre . The Committee was led by the Jacobins, who later died in prison .
 The Committee of Public Safety introduced conscription in order to combat the foreign threat .
 During 1794 the French proved successful against the invading forces of the First Coalition . Victory at Fleurus in June left them in control of the Austrian Netherlands .
 In July the moderate faction ousted Robespierre, who went to the guillotine, ousted him . The moderate faction of the French Revolution ousted him in July . In July he went on to die in prison .
 Executive power vested in a Directory of five members, and a five-year period of moderation set in . Executive power was then vested in five members .
 He was brilliantly successful during 1796, forcing Austria out of the war, but then led an unsuccessful expedition to Egypt to try and cut Britain’s communications with its Indian empire . He was then forced to lead a failed attempt to cut the British communications with India .
 The Directory was overthrown by Napoleon on his return to France in October 1799 . Meanwhile, the Directory had become profoundly unpopular with all sections of the population . Napoleon returned to France and overthrown the Directory .
 In 1800, following the first-ever plebiscite, he was confirmed as First Consul of France . This position gave him supreme authority . He gained overwhelming support in 1800, and was confirmed in 1800 .
 The French Revolution did not occur simultaneously throughout the country, but spread out into the countryside from urban centres . He proceeded to introduce a number of measures to stop the revolution .
 Some areas remained stubbornly resistant to revolutionary rule, but by the mid-1790s even these were brought under the control of central government .
 The crowned heads of Europe feared the spread of revolutionary fervour into their own countries, and were thus anxious to quell the revolutionary French .
 Austrians were eventually defeated at Fleurus, while Prussians were repulsed in Alsace . Sardinians in Savoy, the Spanish in the south, and the British on the Vendee coast and the Mediterranean .
 The French Revolution of 1789 marked the demise of absolutist monarchies and their replacement by nation states in which the middle classes held power .
 The Estates-General was a body of elected representatives which had not met since 1614 . It arose partly from attempts by King Louis XVI to overcome a mounting financial crisis by summoning the Estates General .
 The First and Second Estates refused to surrender any of their privileges . On 17 June 1789 the Third Estate proclaimed itself a National Assembly .
 Riots had broken out in many parts of France early in 1789 in response to a disastrous harvest in 1788 that had reduced many peasants and industrial workers to starvation . The riots were the first of many to break out in France since 1788 .
 The people of Paris stormed the Bastille prison symbol of royal absolutism on 4 July 1789, an enormous wave of popular unrest swept the country . In what was known as the ‘Great Fear’ the property of the aristocracy was looted or seized .
 The National Assembly abolished the tax privileges of the aristocracy and clergy and promulgated the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen . The main principles of bourgeois democracy liberty, equality and property rights were enunciated .
 Other reforms followed, including the replacement of the provinces of France by a centralized state . France was then divided into 84 departments . The French state is now a state of 84 departments, divided into four provinces .
 Part 4 measures to create a centralized administrative structure, including the founding of the Bank of France in 1800 . Between 1801 and L804 a law's was created, known as the Napoleonic Civil Code, which embodied many of the principles of the French Revolution .
 In 1801 be signed a concordat with the Pope, thus helping to ensure that he received the Pope’s approval when he declared himself emperor in 1804 .
 By the end of 1800 France had once again defeated Austrian forces in northern Italy . By February 1801 it had made peace with all its opponents except Britain .
 In October the French fleet was destroyed by the British in the Battle of Trafalgar . By the end of the year Napoleon’s armies had inflicted heavy defeats on the Austrians and Russians at Him and Austerlitz .
 They then moved on through the German states, defeating the Prussians . In October 1806, they defeated the Prussianians .
 Napoleon persuaded the tsar to join forces with France to defeat Britain in 1807 . Britain once again was isolated as Napoleon's sole effective opponent .
 War against the Fifth Coalition resulting from the French military presence tended to make Napoleon's rule unpopular with his subject nations . Napoleon was unpopular with many of his subjects during his rule .
 The imposition of the Napoleonic Civil Code in countries annexed by France still represented an unwelcome domination by the French . The imposition was potentially beneficial to the citizens of Europe, but still represented unwelcome domination .
 Napoleon attempted his most ambitious annexation of territory yet, launching an invasion of Russia in 1812 . It caused disquiet among Napoleon's allies, who in 1810 broke with France, eventually joining Britain and Portugal .
 He reached Moscow in September but found it deserted and, with insufficient supplies, he was forced to retreat . Although lie reached Moscow, he found . He was forced .
 In Spain the British and Portuguese armies finally overcame the French, chasing them onto French soil . In Spain, the French were defeated by the British, Portuguese and Spanish armies .
 At the same time the Prussians, Austrians and other subject states seized the opportunity to rebel against French rule .
 Napoleon abdicated and was exiled to the island of Elba, and U>uls XVJIT ascended the French throne . The Fifth Coalition armies took Paris in March 1814, and Napoleon was exiled .
 Napoleon escaped and raised an army as lie marched north through France . A year later, while Coalition members were negotiating the reshaping of Europe at Congress of Vienna, Napoleon escaped .
 Following defeat at Waterloo in 1815, lie was sent into permanent exile on St Helena . The reconvened Congress of Vienna deprived France of all the territory it had acquired since 1792 . It could not, however, prevent the spread of revolutionary ideas in Europe .
 Napoleon s armies waged war across Europe in an attempt to impose French note and ihe Cnril Code . Ihroughout the conlinem. Napoleon tried to impose a French note on the French currency .
 The turning paint in his fortunes, came in 1812 when, with an army already fighting in Spain, he embarked on on invasion of Russia .
 French supply lines were stretched Eds> far to support ihe army through the Russian winter . The troops were forced to retreat, with mast of the survivors deserting . The survivors deserted .
 Napoleon was eventually raptured in 1814 on French soil by the armies of the Fifth Coalition . He was eventually imprisoned on the island of Elba on Elba, Elba .
 From 1793 onwards the rulers of the European slates formed various alliances, in an attempt to counter the threat from France . The final battle occurred following the defeat of the French army at Waterloo, in Belgium, on 18 June 1815 .
 Britain was a common member, with other countries joining when it became expedient to do so . Britain was one of the world's most successful nations .
 Russia aka joined oil five coalitions, although it was allied to France from 1807 to 1810 . Russia was allied with France in the early 1800s .
 Spain, a member of the First Coalition, became a French ally from 179b until the Spanish people rose up in protest in IBD8 and precipitated the Peninsular War . Charles IV was forced to abdicate in favour of Napoleons brother Joseph .
 London's largest centre of manufacturing was London, whose products included silk, gin, soap, glass and furniture . The largest city of manufacturing in the world was London .
 Its population had increased from an estimated 120,000 to 675,000 between 1550 and 1750 . The resultant demand encouraged developments in agriculture, industry and transport .
 650,000 tonnes of coal was shipped to London from Newcastle each year a trade that employed 15,000 people by 1750 .
 Britain became the world’s leading industrial nation in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . The process of economic growth and change that is regarded as the first industrial revolution .
 In some respects, however, the process was of an evolutionary nature, with change occurring at different speeds in different sectors of the economy . The process was in some respects of a evolutionary nature .
 The process of industrialization first occurred in Britain rather than any other country in Europe . There were a number of reasons why the process first occurred .
 In 1750 Britain had a well-developed and specialized economy, substantial overseas trade and an average per capita national income that was one of the highest in Europe .
 The country was also fortunate in its natural resources, among them fertile land on which fertile land had been able to develop . The country also had a productive agricultural sector, with fertile land .
 Early enclosure of fields meant that British agriculture could feed a rapidly increasing urban workforce . Agricultural improvements and livestock breeding led to the development of British agriculture .
 Supplies of coal fundamental to the nature of Britain’s industrialization were widespread and plentiful . The development of a national market in coal was facilitated by coastal trade .
 Navigable rivers provided initial internal transport, while faster-flowing rivers supplied water power for industry and corn-milling . Navigability rivers provided internal transport for internal transport .
 The British government also played a very important role in establishing the conditions under which industry could thrive . The government also helped establish the conditions for the industry to thrive .
 Britain was free from internal customs barriers and river tolls which stifled trade in Europe, while laws protected the textile and iron industries from foreign competition .
 Private property rights and a stable currency stimulated economic development . The stability provided by a strong state in which warfare, taxation and the public debt were managed by sophisticated bureaucracies .
 Shipping and trade protected by Britain’s naval supremacy, which also helped secure trading privileges and build up a worldwide colonial empire obliged to conduct trade using British ships .
 Britain remained free from invasion and escaped the economic dislocation engendered by war on the continent of Europe . Rapid economic progress was further encouraged by Britain’s success in war of 1793-1815 .
 The war created a demand for armaments, ships and uniforms, which in turn stimulated Britain’s shipbuilding, iron-smelting, engineering and textile industries .
 Silk, linen, fustian (a mixture of linen and cotton) and wool had long been produced in Britain . In 1750 a variety of textiles silk, linen was produced in the UK .
 The skilled workforce employed in both industries was largely home-based and organized by merchants who thus built up capital and entrepreneurial skills . The skilled workers employed in the industries were largely home based .
 The cotton industry developed rapidly in the second half of the 18th century . Such skills were used to great effect in cotton industry .
 Lancashire produced cotton cloth more cheaply than India, where production depended on low-paid labour . Technological change allowed Lancashires to produce and sell cotton cloth .
 Arkwright's water frame and Watt’s steam-powered rotative engine transformed cotton spinning in the last decade of the 18th century into a factory-based, urban industry .
 Lancashire became the centre of the world’s cotton manufacturing industry . It exported cotton cloth throughout the world, exporting cotton cloth .
 The woollen industry continued to be of importance, especially in the West Riding of Yorkshire . British wool was supplemented by merino wool imported from Australia .
 Innovation in iron production in the 18th century facilitated smelting, and later refining, using coke instead of charcoal . Iron, coal and transport are key to iron production .
 Steam power, fuelled by plentiful coal supplies, began to replace man, horse and water power . Steam power encouraged the development of the factory system and rapid urbanization .
 Steam engines increased the demand for coal and iron . Better steam-driven pumps and rotary winding equipment facilitated deeper coalmines . These developments were self-sustaining .
 Canals were constructed to carry heavy and bulky goods, and roads were improved by turnpike trusts . Turnpikes opened up the national market for goods, opening up the country's market .
 The combination of colliery waggon ways and the steam engine led to the piecemeal development of a rail network from 1825 onwards . By 1850, the rail network had links to the major urban centres .
 The consequences of the Industrial Revolution were complex and wide-ranging . The economic and social effects of industrialization were complex . The social and economic effects of the industrial revolution were complex, social .
 Eleven per cent lived in London, which remained the largest manufacturing centre . More than 60 towns and cities had over 20,000 inhabitants .
 Crowded and insanitary living conditions meant that urban death rates were considerably higher than those in rural areas . Crowded living conditions in urban areas were the main reasons for urban deaths .
 Some workers resented capitalist control of work processes and the replacement of traditional skills by machines . At the same time, the development of the factory system generated issues of discipline, as well as issues of working discipline .
 London's brewing and refining industries in particular were among the largest in the country . Mare loanage passed through the port of London than any other port in Brrfoin .
 Moral debates were prompted by the employment of women and children as cheap labour . Moral debates have been prompted by employment of children and women in factories .
 The vast majority of the industrial working population was employed in retailing and warehousing, workshops and small enterprises rather than in factories .
 Capital and technology had become less involved with agriculture and more involved with industry, especially manufacturing, and with trade and construction related to industry . Capital and tech had become more involved in agriculture than in agriculture .
 Most of Britain's food was still home-prod need . Vet agriculture was still the largest single occupation in Britain .
 By 1850 Britain was no longer the only country to have undergone an industrial revolution . By 1850 the industrial revolution had spread across the world .
 The process of industrialization was eventually to lead to Britain losing its position as the world’s greatest industrial power . As the papulation of England increased, its geographical distribution shifted in favour of the developing industrial regions .
 Lancashire, ihe Wesi Riding and Devon, the most populated counties shared 10 per cent of the told Engfeh population . ly 1851 the four mast industrialized counties contained nearly a quarter af ihe English papulation .
 The availability of resources such as cool and iron ore largely determined the sites for the development of heavy industries . Home-based manufacture of textiles was transformed into factory-based manufacturing, by the use of water-power .
 Industrialization of Europe is considered to have started in the 1830s, some decades after the beginning of the Industrial Revolution in Britain in the late 18th century . Industrialization in Europe began in 1830s .
 Much debate has centred on whether British industrialization ‘spilled over’ into Europe, or whether European countries accumulated their own technological and manufacturing knowledge . Much of the debate has been focused on whether industrialization 'spilled' over into Europe .
 There were substantial flows of skilled labour, entrepreneurs, capital and technology from Britain to less industrialized parts of Europe . There were also flows of capital and capital from France and Germany, and later from France .
 The basic model of industrialization remained British, but each country developed its own national characteristics . However, although the basic model remained British .
 Substitutes were found for the resources that Britain possessed but which other countries lacked . More organized banking systems supplied finance to accelerate growth, and more aware governments supplied ideologies and incentives to motivate growth .
 Industrialization in continental Europe was more state-driven and more revolutionary in character than in Britain . As a result, industrialization in the countries of continental Europe has been more revolutionary than in the UK .
 The culmination of this model was the abrupt industrialization of the USSR under the Soviet system from 1917 onwards . The Soviet system was based on the model of industrialization in Russia .
 In the first half of the 19th century many of Europe’s modern nation-states were yet to come into existence . Europe's first nation-state was formed in the early 1900s .
 The process of industrialization often took place in the context of shifting political allegiances and the forging of national identities .
 Political alliances and wars, such as the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71, introduced border changes that were often haphazard in economic terms .
 Industry in its early stages was predominantly confined to a number of rather circumscribed regions . Industry was largely confined to areas within a few of the country's borders .
 The existence of coal and iron was the most important criterion for determining the speed at which regions developed . Locally available resources were also important, especially the supply of skills in textile regions .
 Some of the emerging industrial regions subsequently faded, such as the areas around Le Havre, Leipzig and Dresden . Some new ones emerged, including that bordering the Ruhr in Germany, while others faded .
 Even at the beginning of the 21st century, much industrial activity in Europe is dominated by regional ‘clusters’ of activity, rather than by a general spread of industrialization .
 The pattern of European industrialization (starting in northwest Europe and moving northwards, southwards and eastwards) tends to support that it was based on that of Britain .
 It is beyond doubt that the technological advances developed in Britain did not need to be reinvented . Technology developed in the UK has not been reinvented in the last century .
 The technology often needed to be modified to suit local conditions . However, the technology often needs to be adapted to suit the local climate .
 The type of steam engine most popular in Britain consumed too much coal for its use to be worthwhile in regions where coal was more expensive than in Britain .
 Water-wheels and the more efficient water turbines were often used to power machinery in France and Italy . As a result, waterwheels often used in machinery .
 Machine developed for the manufacture of woollen and cotton cloth in Britain was not as suitable for the finer textiles of France and Spain .
 The scattering of industrial areas encouraged the growth of railway systems to facilitate the delivery of raw materials to manufacturers and the distribution of manufactured goods to customers .
 In countries such as Spain and Italy the railway was envisaged as the catalyst that would set in motion the process of industrialization . But in these countries, which were among the last to industrialize, the building of railway lines had little appreciable effect .
 Belgium and France often had the effect of widening social inequalities for some years . It often had to be egalitarian .
 The national income per head, the most common indicator of overall prosperity and growth, rose throughout Europe . But its steepest increase was in northern Europe, where industrialization took its strongest hold . Industrialization took the strongest hold.
 Industrializing nations as a whole, and certain sectors in particular, enjoyed long-term economic benefits . So, despite the squalor and misery of industrial regions and cities, it seems to be that industrializing nations enjoyed economic benefits.
 In northern France and Germany, industrialization is not reflected in the per capita figures of those countries, since the majority of the population was still engaged in agricultural production . Elsewhere in northern Europe, and in Switzerland, industrialized made considerable headway .
 Belgium experienced a spurt early on and then again at the turn of the century . Others, such as Scandinavia, were relatively late developers .
 Britain had a 13. per cent share of the world industrial output in 1913, Germany had 14. percent . Germany was second only to the United States in terms of its industrial might . The United States had the second largest share of industrial output .
 The most obvious effect of industrialization was on economic growth and on the living standards of the populations of the industrialized countries . Industrialization was a major factor in the growth of the population .
 The nations of northern Europe (including Denmark) pulled away from the rest of Europe in terms of their national wealth .
 39 Germon spouting slptas wore nrgcmued in the German Confederation . Prussia dominated by Prussia, which was given hotf af Saxony . Poland was divided once again in 1792 .
 Auslria lost its possessions in norlhwttf Europe to the Dutch in the newly created United Netherlands, but was given much of narihem itoFy by woy of compensation .
 During the 1620s and early 163&s rebellions broke out . with liberals calling for an end to absolute ftwnordiy in Spain . ond Portugal and in the llolwn peninsula .
 The Greeks, with the help of the French, British and Russians, drove the Ottomans out of Atorea . The Russians intervened to crash rebettw in Pobnd in 1830, having defeated their Decembrist Revolution in 162S .
 In 1814, the major European powers met at the Congress of Vienna to decide on the future political map of Europe .
 The Congress was dominated by territorial compensation for the victors, the restoration and affirmation of the ruling royal dynasties, and the achievement of a balance of power between the major European states .
 National boundaries were redrawn, often with little regard to ethnic groupings, thus planting the seeds of nationalist tensions . Elsewhere, national boundaries have been redrawn without regard for ethnic groups . Nationalist tensions have been fueled by the rise of nationalism .
 There was a shared conviction that the spread of republican and revolutionary movements must be prevented . There was also a shared belief that the spreading of republicanism was prevented .
 Russia, Austria and Prussia formed a ""Holy Alliance” in September 1815 . They agreed to guarantee all existing boundaries and governments and uphold the principles of Christianity throughout Europe .
 The alliance was subsequently joined by the other major European powers with the exception of Britain, the Pope and, not surprisingly, the Ottoman sultan . Over the next 40 years there were several occasions when the autocratic rulers of Europe took military action to suppress uprisings in states other than
 In 1820 there was an explosion of revolutionary activity in Spain . Revolutionary activity in the south of Spain .
 In 1820 his authority was challenged by an army revolt, supported by riots across Spain . The liberal constitution was re-established after the revolt .
 Insurrections in Naples, Piedmont and Portugal in the summer of 1820 also attempted to introduce constitutional forms of government, and initially met with some success . Part 4 of the series of attempts to introduce a constitutional form of government is shown below .
 In March 1821 Austria sent an army to crush the revolts in Piedmont and Naples . Tsar Alexander I of Russia persuaded the Austrians and Prussians to support him in threatening military intervention .
 In December 1825 Russia faced revolutionary action on its own soil when a group of military officers tried unsuccessfully to prevent the accession to the tsardom of Nicholas I . Nicholas I preferred his more liberal-minded brother .
 The following year the continuing instability in Portugal prompted the British to intervene, in this instance with the intention of aiding the preservation of its constitutional government . The British intervention was in response to the instability of the Portuguese government .
 In Greece a revolution broke out in 1821 with the aim of shaking off Ottoman rule and uniting the whole of the ancient Hellenic state under a liberal constitution . In Greece, the revolution was aimed at shaking off the Ottoman rule of the century .
 The Ottomans enlisted support from the Egyptian viceroy Muhammad Ali, whose troops seized a large area of the country by 1826 . Russia, France and Britain intervened to defeat the Muslim forces .
 By 1830 revolutionary passions were rising in France . Unrest in the north was a major source of unrest .
 King Charles X dissolved an unco-operative Chamber of Deputies and called an election, but when an equally anti-royal Chamber resulted, he called fresh elections with a restricted electorate . The king then dissolved the uncooperative chamber and called for fresh elections .
 Demonstrations in Paris during July forced him to abdicate in favour of Louis Philippe . The right to call elections was removed from the French throne .
 His reign, known as the “July Monarchy’s, saw insurrections as industrial workers and members of the lower middle class demanded an increased share of political power, including the vote .
 Nationalist resentment at decisions taken at Congress of Vienna led to insurrection in both Belgium and Poland in the 1830s .
 In 1830, riots broke out in Belgium, which had been given to the United Netherlands in 1815 . In October, independence was declared in October, 1830 .
 Inequalities in the electoral system provoked a strong movement for reform, which resulted in the Great Reform Bill of 1832 . The bill was passed by the British Parliament in 1832 and became the first major reform in British history .
 This expanded the electorate by 50 per cent and ensured representation from the newly developed industrial centres . It also ensured representation for the industrial centres in the country .
 Further calls were made by the Chartists for universal suffrage . Petition petitions were presented to Parliament in 1838 and again in 1848 .
 Many of the European countries were suffering from an economic crisis in 1848 . The failure of the potato and grain crops in 1845-46 was reflected in the price of food .
 Revolutionary agitation began in Paris in February 1848, forcing the abdication of Louis Philippe and the establishment of the Second Republic . The Second Republic was the French capital of France .
 Malta demands of the Hungarian nationalists and granted them a separate constitution . Malta also granted them the right to separate constitutions of Hungary .
 This, however, was annulled some months later, leading to a declaration of independence by Hungary . However, the annulling of this declaration by Hungary led to an annulment of independence from Hungary .
 Discontent in Austria spilled over into the southern states of the German Confederation . Liberals in Berlin demanded a more constitutional government .
 The first National Parliament of the German Confederation was summoned in May 1848 . As a result, the first parliament of the Confederation was called in .
 In June 1848 struggles between the moderate and the radical republicans culminated in three days of rioting on the streets of Paris . Three days of riots took place in the French capital during the French Revolution .
 In crushing the rioters the more conservative factions gained control . The trend was repeated in Prussia, where royal power was reaffirmed .
 Second half of 1848 was marked by waves of reaction that spread from one city to another . The second half of the 1848 period was marked with waves of reactions .
 The restoration of Austrian control over Hungary was achieved partly by playing off against each other the different ethnic groups within the empire . The restored control of the Hungarian empire was partly achieved partly through playing off each other .
 Despite the suppression of the 1848 revolutionaries, most of the reforms they had proposed were carried out in the second half of the century . Some of the nationalist movements were successful, and some of them were successful .
 The Habsburgs faced rebellions in Hungary and in the Italian cities of Milan and Venice, which were supported by Piedmont . They faced a revolt in Hungary, which was supported by the Habsenburgs . The revolt was the result of a revolt by the Pied
 The revolutions in Italy, Germany and Hungary were all defeated but the liberal constitutions, unification and independence they were seeking did eventually come about . Although the revolutions were defeated, they were eventually achieved .
 During ihe 1 Blh century ttie Habsburg Empire look every opportunity to . es pond its territory al Ihe eitpenw of ite neighbours, . As a result of Ihe Wnr of the Spanish Succession, the Habsbergs gwned
 Ring Louis XIV of France supported the claim to the Spanish throne of Philip, Duke of Anjou, who was his infant grandson and the greatnephew of Charles . Philip was Philip's infant grandson, and was Charles' great nephew, Philip's son .
 Peace of Utrecht was a compromise under which Philip attained the Spanish throne on condition that he renounced any claim to France . Austrians gained control of territory in Italy and the Netherlands . The outcome was formalized in the Peace of U.S.
 During the 18th century the Austrian Habsburgs were the major dynastic power in central Europe . During the 18th century they were the most powerful dynastates in central Europe . The Austria Habsburg was the major dynastic 
 Other crowned heads of Europe refused to recognize Charles VI of Austria as his daughter Maria Theresa as his successor in 1740 . They were threatened, however, when on the death of Charles VI, they were threatened . Maria Theresa was the daughter of the late Charles VI .
 Bavaria, France, Spain, Sardinia, Prussia and Saxony joined forces against Austria, the Netherlands and Britain in an unsuccessful attempt to oust Maria Theresa . The resulting War of the Austrian Succession was the result of the resulting conflict .
 During her reign Maria Theresa embarked on transforming the diverse Habsburg dominions into a centralized nation state . Maria Theresa initiated many progressive reforms in the spheres of education, law and the Church .
 Her minister, Hagwitz, put the Habsburg finances on a more stable footing, and these reforms reduced the rivalry between ethnic Germans and Czechs .
 When Joseph II succeeded his mother in 1780, he was able to build on her centralizing policies . His most radical reform that of the tax system was abolished by his successor, Leopold II .
 The Habsburg Empire was involved in a succession of wars against France . It temporarily lost much of Austria, as well as territories in northern Italy and along the Adriatic .
 Foreign Minister Metternich used his influence to persuade the other major European powers to assist Austria in crushing revolts in Spain, Naples and Piedmont .
 His methods involved the limited use of secret police and the partial censorship of universities and freemasons . His own methods involved using secret police, partial censorship .
 Reforms of the legal and administrative systems were set to take effect in Hungary later that year . Reforms did not apply to the rest of the Habsburg territories .
 The unrest started in Vienna in March 1848 (as a result of which Metternich was dismissed) and spread to Prague, Venice and Milan . The unrest in Vienna started in 1848 and spread across the world .
 A Constituent Assembly was summoned to revise the constitution, but its only lasting action was to abolish serfdom . The only lasting act of the Constituency Assembly was abolishing serfedom .
 By the autumn the unrest had reached Hungary as a number of ethnic groups within the empire made bids for greater national rights and freedoms . The unrest reached Hungary in the autumn as ethnic groups in the empire bid for greater rights .
 Ferdinand I abdicated in December in favour of his nephew, Francis Joseph . In December the ineffectual Ferdinand I was replaced by his nephew .
 Not feeling bound by the April Laws, Francis Joseph annulled the Hungarian constitution, causing the Hungarian leader Louis Kossuth to declare a republic . The April Laws were the result of the annulling of Hungary's constitution .
 From 1849 onwards an even more strongly centralized system of government was established . The new system was established in 1849 . It was the first of its kind in the country .
 Trade and commerce were encouraged by fiscal reforms, and the railway network expanded .
 Coupled with peasant emancipation for which landowners had been partially compensated by the government, these measures led to a trebling of the national debt over ten years . The measures were followed by peasant emancipation .
 Hungarian nobles wished to see the restoration of the April Laws . Higher taxes and a national loan raised from wealthier citizens led to discontent among Hungarian nobles .
 Several factors combined in the 1860s to create a period of crisis for the Habsburg Empire . Crisis and change occurred in Austria and Austria between 1860 and 1914 .
 Austria was unable to keep pace with military developments because of the insistence of the international banks that it balance its budget . It was becoming clear that Prussia, under Bismarck, presented an increasing threat, but Austria could not cope .
 Unrest in Hungary was presenting a threat to the monarchy, and also making it difficult to collect taxes and recruit for the army . The unrest in Hungary presented a serious threat to Hungary's monarchy, the king said .
 A centralized government was unacceptable to the Hungarian nobility, but provincial government would be unworkable because of ethnic conflict . The Hungarian nobility wanted a central government, but it was unacceptable . A central government would have been unacceptable to Hungarian nobility .
 Austria was forced to reach a constitutional settlement with Hungary in 1867, forming the Dual Monarchy of Austria-Hungary . Austria and Hungary were forced to form a joint monarchy after the war .
 Each nation had an independent constitution and legislature . Francis Joseph was crowned head of both countries .
 Many ethnic groups within the Dual Monarchy became increasingly vocal in their demands for the right to promote their language and culture, if not for outright autonomy .
 In Hungary, a knowledge of Hungarian was necessary for anyone with middle-class aspirations . Other languages were not actually repressed, although other languages were .
 Croatia was granted partial autonomy within Hungary in 1878, but continued to be dominated by its larger partner . Croatia became part of the larger country in the 1878-1878 period . Croatia was given partial autonomy in Hungary, but was not fully independent .
 There were also demands for greater autonomy from the Czechs in Austria, which were resisted by the German-speaking majority . The Czechs also demanded greater autonomy in Austria .
 It was annexed in 1908 in order to protect Habsburg trade routes to and from the Dalmatian coast . The annexation was made to protect trade routes between Austria and Croatia .
 The resulting incorporation of a large number of Serbs into the empire was actively opposed by Serbian nationalists . Serbian nationalists were to contribute to the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 .
 Treaty of Saint-Germain broke up the empire after defeat of Austro-Hungarians in World War II . Austria and Hungary reduced to less than a quarter of their former area .
 Hungary was granted equal status to that of Austria in 1867 . However, they were forced to give it up in the mid-19th century during the process of Italian unification .
 In 1849, with Louis Kossuth appointed president of an independent republic of Hungary, the Austrians accepted Russian assistance, offered in the spirit of the Holy Alliance . The rebels were eventually crushed at the Battle of Timisoara in 1849 .
 Lombardy was liberated in 1859 following a war waged by Piedmont and France . Lombardy became part of the Lombardy in 1860 . The region was ceded to Frante 1860 .
 Florence, Parma and Madwia were also overthrown and provisional gavernmeals set up under Piedmontese authority . Hw outocrahr infers af Florence and Parma overthrown .
 In May 1861 Garibaldi answered requests for support from Sicilian revolutionaries . He proceeded to rout the Neapolitan army in a series of battles and proclaim himself ruler of the Kingdom of the Two Skifos .
 Venetia was reded by Austria to Italy, fallowing Austria's defeat of 1066 at the hands of the Prussians . Italy had supported Austria's victory in 1066, which was supported by Italy .
 The unification of Italy and Germany as nation-states was one of the most important developments in 19thcentury Europe . It fundamentally altered the balance of power in the continent .
 nationalist feeling was stimulated by the French Revolution of 1789, but unification was actually the result of diplomacy, war and the efforts of conservative elites rather than of popular action .
 German unification was promoted by Prussia, the most powerful German state, in order to protect its own domestic political stability . In Italy, Piedmont played this role for similar reasons .
 Napoleonic Wars had a dramatic effect on Italy . Attempts to l mf y Italy were made to stop the rise of the Roman Empire .
 Napoleon redrew boundaries and introduced French political and legal ideas . Napoleon rewrote boundaries and created French borders . Napoleon also introduced French politics and legal laws .
 These developments are a major setback for Italian nationalists, who sought to remove foreign interference and unite Italy . These developments were major setback to Italian nationalists .
 A major figure in this movement was A Iht Congress of Vienna m IBM—15 restored member* of Ihe ewiservaiive iGlared boundaries wiihm Italy ital tad Austrian Habsburg dynosly lo pwwr to ben last under Najwbon
 Giuseppe Mazzini hoped the people would overthrow their existing rulers, both Italian and foreign . Ii dso Modena, Parma and Tuscany the idealist hoped to overthrow the existing rulers .
 In 1848 a wave of revolutionary fervour swept the cities of Europe including those in Italy* where the rebels attempted to dispense with Austrian domination and to persuade local rulers to introduce constitutions .
 King Charles Albert of the kingdom of Sardinia hoped to defuse the revolutions by expelling the Austrians from Lombardy and Venetia . But military defeats at Custozza and Novara forced him to abdicate in 1849 in favour of his son Victor Emmanuel IL in
 Moderate nationalists concluded that the hest hope for Italian unification lay with Piedmont* which was economically advanced and had introduced a relatively liberal constitution . Moderate nationalists conclude that the best hope for unification lay in the region of the Italian peninsula .
 Garibaldi transferred the territory he had conquered to the Piedmontese king, who became head of the unified kingdom of Italy proclaimed in 1861 . Garibald then transferred his territory to the king of Italy, who was head of a unified kingdom .
 The remaining territories of Venetia and the Patrimony of St Peter were annexed during the subsequent ten years . Venetian and Patriarchia were annexed by the Roman Empire in 1881 .
 In 1806 Napoleon dissolved the empire, replacing it with a new Confederation of the Rhine . The new Confederation included states in southern and western Germany, but excluding Austria and Prussia .
 Confederation became a French satellite of the French Empire . It adopted the Napoleonic legal code and constitution modelled on that of France . Confederation became French satellite .
 Plans to create a federal army and achieve constitutional harmony among the states failed . A diet was established at Frankfurt, presided over by Austria .
 Prussian king, Frederick William IV, introduced constitutional reforms and seemed sympathetic towards German unification . Following unrest in Berlin, he introduced reforms and was sympathetic towards unification .
 Middle-class German nationalists established a parliament at Frankfurt which drew up a constitution for a future German Empire . The constitution was drawn up by middle-class nationalists .
 They were divided over whether to pursue a ‘Greater Germany’ or a smaller grouping, dominated by Protestant Prussia .
 The parliament fell apart in July 1849 and by the end of the year the old order had been restored in Germany and the Austrian Empire .
 Industrialization made Prussia the richest German state, and increased its military power relative to that of Austria . Prussia became the richest state in Germany .
 Otto von Bismarck was the Prussian Chancellor between 1862 and 1871 . He played a key role in the unification of Germany . The Prussian state of Prussia was founded in 1861 .
 Bismarck sought to secure Prussian influence over northern and central Germany, and to weaken Austria’s position, he says . He sought to see Austrian and Prussian interests as incompatible .
 He hoped that success in foreign affairs would enable him to control Prussia’s liberals, he said . He hoped to control the liberal side of Prussia .
 In 1864 Austria and Prussia jointly ousted Denmark from control of Schleswig and Holstein . The two powers increasingly competed for control of the German Confederation . Austria and Germany were keen to take over the duchies of the Duchies .
 When Bismarck engineered a war with Austria in 1866, most German states supported Austria . Most of Germany supported Austria in the war .
 Prussia, however, enjoyed advantages in military technology and defeated Austria quickly, signalling the end of the German Confederation and making German unification under Prussian leadership more likely .
 Prussian king, William I, became the Confederation’s president, responsible for defence and foreign policy . Each member state retained some autonomy, but each member state was given some autonomy . The Confederation was founded in 1881, when it was first formed in Germany .
 Bismarck used their fear of the territorial ambitions of Napoleon III of France to persuade them to ally with Prussia . Although the south German states were apprehensive about Prussian domination, they joined Prussia.
 Bismarck needed to neutralize France if he was to achieve German unification on his terms . He therefore provoked a war over the succession to the Spanish throne . The war was over the Spanish succession .
 In the resulting Franco-Prussian War France was decisively defeated, losing the largely German-speaking areas of Alsace and Lorraine to Prussia .
 In January 1871, in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles, the German Empire was declared, merging the south German states with the North German Confederation . The German Empire became the German Republic in 1871 .
 The Prussian king became emperor and most government posts were put into Prussian hands . The new empire had a federal constitution, leaving each state with some powers, but each state had some powers .
 A united Germany represented a powerful new economic force in Europe . With well-developed industrial regions in the north and east, a united Germany was a powerful economic force . Germany's industrial regions were well developed in the early 1950s .
 During 1870-71 the Prussians, under Kaiser William I and Chancellor Bismarck, defeated the French army and laid siege to Paris . A Prussian invasion of Paris was the first French invasion of France .
 The display of strength convinced the southern German states to join with the North German Confederation in a unified Germany dominated by Prussia . This display of power convinced the south to join the Confederation .
 T The German Confederation was established following the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 . It was established after the French Revolution in France .
 Prussia comprised 39 German-speaking states, by far the largest was Prussia . It included states under the control of the Habsburg Empire, under the influence of the Spanish Empire .
 During the 18th century the major European states became more of a threat to the f Etonians . During the . 18th . century the . major European . states become more of the . threat than the Etonian .
 It was clear that the weaponry' and military capacity of the European states were moving ahead of those of their Islamic counterparts . European states are moving ahead with their military capacity, it was clear .
 At the same time, Europe's ideological conflicts reverberated among the Ottoman Empire's Christian subjects, encouraging bids for separatism and liberty which usually had Russian backing .
 Whole communities in the Caucasus switched allegiance from the Ottoman states to the Russian Empire . Disaffection spread among the prosperous and previously co-operative Greeks of the empire's heartlands .
 Ottoman state responded to its losses with a programme of expensive remilitarization and political and economic reform and development, funded precariously from what were now seriously reduced revenues .
 The strategy for survival was to replace the empire’s traditional patchwork of cultural and religious communities with a new model Ottoman society’ in which there was one legal system, one citizen status and one tax rating lor all .
 This was progressive, liberal 19th-century policy', but it attacked vested Interests in the provinces and among the Muslim clergy . It attacked vested interests in the province and among Muslim clergy, says historian .
 The reform movement engendered a limited revival of international confidence in the Ottomans . The reforms were largely unsuccessful, but they were seen as a major success .
 During the Crimean War of 1853-56, British and French armies fought to defend Ottoman interests against Russian military escalation in exchange for an Ottoman commitment to equality of status for its Muslim and non-Muslim subjects . The Crimean War was fought in return for the Ottoman commitment .
 Ottoman authorities were still employing ill-disciplined troops to contain unruly Balkan Christians, provoking an international outcry and eventually die resumption of full-scale war with Russia . Under the agreement reached at the Congress of Berlin in 1878, die region s political map was redrawn
 Abdul Hamid II swiftly shelved the constitution he had adopted as the price of survival in 1876 . The new sultan quickly shelved his constitution as the cost of survival . The constitution was shelved by the sultan as a result of the fall of the Ottoman Empire .
 The empire’s political geography was now predominantly Middle Eastern, and Abdul Hamid was keen to exploit it . The empire was largely dominated by the Middle East, with the rise of Islam in 1774 .
 The birth of the Republic of Turkey 1920-23 I I Republic flfbkto 1923 Boundary of Ottonart tortrd BtahlRted by Treaty of Stores 1920 Elfii Area pieced under (keek cdmmisitctiw 1919 I WWi {on
 Pan-Islamic policies met widespread criticism from those within the Ottoman elite . The Ottoman elite would have preferred a state with a nationalist Turkish identity to a more diffuse Ottoman or Islamic facade .
 The CUP was committed to the retention of ‘Turkey in Europe’ and relatively dismissive of the empire’s Middle Eastern provinces and peoples . CUP committed to retention of Turkey in Europe .
 In 1908 they forced the sultan to renew the long-suspended constitution of 1876 . The following year they deposed him in favour of his more pliant brother . The sultan was deposed in 1908 .
 The CUP set out with democratic ideals but found that these were incompatible with the empire’s ethnic divisions . CUP found it was incompatible with ethnic divisions in the empire .
 Showpiece general elections served chiefly to demonstrate the voting power of the minorities, particularly the Arabs . The Arab-Arab vote was a key factor in the Arab vote .
 CUP administration survived only by becoming increasingly dictatorial, particularly when it faced a new round of territorial losses . CUP was forced to take control of its territory in order to survive .
 Enver Pasha took the Ottoman Empire to war in 1914 with German military assistance . The CUP leader of the CUP took over the situation in an attempt to remedy it .
 Thousands of Christian Armenians massacred for their pro-Russian sympathies . Casualties were immense and the loyalty of the minority populations was suspect .
 Apathy and disaffection among the empire’s Arab Muslims was even more dangerous . Apathy is even more important for the Arab Muslims in the Middle East, writes Peter Bergen .
 In 1916 the Hashemi ‘sharif’ raised a desert army which, allied with the British, successfully detached all remaining Arab provinces from Turkish control . In 1916, the governor of Mecca raised the army .
 Post-war schemes for dismembering the empire and reducing the Ottoman sultanate to puppet status were built into the Treaty of Sevres . The sultan’s administration in Constantinople meekly accepted, thereby losing any last shred of credibility . The birth of the new Turkey
 By 1923 the Ankara regime had won diplomatic and military recognition from all its former antagonists, including the Greeks, who had been defeated by Kemal’s forces in 1922 .
 Sevres agreement was replaced by the more generous Treaty of Lausanne . Treaty legitimized Ankara’s right to govern an independent Turkish Republic in a region broadly corresponding to modem Turkey .
 The Ottoman sultanate was abolished by the treaty and the archaic caliphate followed it into extinction in 1924 . The caliphate was followed by the Ottoman sultimacy of the sultry caliphate .
 The Greeks, who saw the Turkish defeat as an opportunity to claim territory in western Anatolia with a substantial Greek population, had dispatched troops to Smyrna in 1919 . The Greeks saw the victory as a chance to claim the territory they wanted in Anatolia .
 Between 1920 and 1922 their troops established a firm grip on the region . Between 1920-22, 1922 they were able to take control of the region's borders .
 In August 1922 a Turkish nationalist army attacked the Greek forces and drove them from Anatolia in disarray . During this time, Turkish nationalists became increasingly organized under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal .
 The Republic of Turkey was founded in 1923 . The other European powers withdrew, recognizing the overwhelming Turkish support for Kemal .
 Romania soon cut its ties with Russia and in 1883 made an alliance with Germany and Austria . This marked the end of expansion to the west . However, this marked the beginning of Romania's expansion .
 In the southwest the Transcaucasian territories were acquired between 1801 and 1830 and the route to them was finally secured by the conquest of Ghechenia — completed in 1859 and Cherkessia in 1864 . In the west, Ghechensia was completed in
 In 1885, Russian troops clashed with Afghan forces at Pendjeh and came up against another imperialist power, Britain . Britain sent a stem warning that Afghanistan was not for the taking .
 In the m id-19 th century Russia also turned Its attention to the eastern end of Asia, acquiring the regions north and south of the Amur River . Russia also acquired the regions .
 Vladivostok was established as a vital warm-water port that gave yearround maritime access to the Far Bast . This enabled it to establish Vladovostok the vital warm water port . It was the first port to be established in the region to provide year-round access to
 The Trans-Siberian Railway built between 1891 and 1904 linked Vladivostok to Moscow, and brought potential for trade with the Far East . It tempted Russian policymakers to take over Manchuria in order to provide a more direct route to the coast .
 The dream of eastern expansion reached both its apogee and its catastrophe in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904—5, which resulted in a humiliating defeat for Russia . Russia was defeated by Japan in the war .
 The economic development of the Russian Empire was continuous throughout the 19th century and into the 20th century . Four periods can be distinguished between the two periods of Russian Empire .
 First there was slow and steady growth from 1800 to 1885, interrupted by setbacks in the 1860s . The iron industry in the Urals was adversely affected by the emancipation of the serfs .
 From 1885 to 1900, there was rapid government-induced growth, with a onesided emphasis on railway building and heavy industry . Then, from 1885 until 1900, the economy was booming .
 Economic stagnation, prolonged by the effects of the revolution of 1905-7, constituted the third period of economic stagnation . Economic stagnation was prolonged by effects of revolution .
 The final period, from 1908 to 1914, was a time of renewed economic growth on a broader front . It was a period of renewed growth on the broader front of the economy .
 The rush to emigrate to Siberia was stimulated by the government itself, with the intention of solving the problem of land shortage in European Russia that had contributed greatly to the rural disturbances of 1905-7 .
 Emigration to Siberia increased rapidly and the population of Siberia rose from 5. million in 1897 to 8 million in 1910 . Emigration increased rapidly to Siberia and population rose to 8. million .
 Settlement was concentrated along the Trans-Siberian Railway . It provided a link back to the west for developing capitalist agriculture and the gold, copper and coal mines .
 Russia’s economy expanded in the 1890s with little attention to infrastructure and a complete refusal to link economic with political changes . The 1905 Revolution was Russia's first major economic experiment in the country's history .
 This created tremendous tensions in the Russian social fabric, which were exacerbated by the government’s repressive measures and its attempts at a gigantic foreign-policy diversion . This created a tremendous tension in Russia, which was exacerbated by repressive measures .
 The revolution of 1905 started under liberal slogans, and indeed the demand for representative popular government on the Western model was a common denominator throughout .
 It developed, however, into something much more threatening than a mere change of political regime . It developed into something that could be very dangerous .
 These institutions acted as local organs of power, initally side by side with the old authorities, and in some cases led armed revolts that aimed at the complete overthrow of the imperial government . In some cases, these institutions were involved in the overthrow .
 They were to resurface in 1917, with a decisive impact on Russian and world history . They resurfaced in Russia and Russia, with an important role in history .
 The revolution of 1905 was not simply an urban movement of Russian workers and intellectuals . The revolution was not just a movement of urban workers, intellectuals and intellectuals, it was a social movement .
 Agriculture had been neglected by the state in its drive for industrialization . Since the emancipation of the serfs in 1861 it had experienced either stagnation or a slight improvement .
 Non-Russian nationalities also revolted in 1905, demanding autonomy or independence . The non-Russians demanded autonomy or autonomy depending on their maturity .
 The formation of the Soviet Union in 1922 delayed establishment of independent national states on the territory of the former Russian Empire for nearly 70 years . These demands would also resurface in 1917, leading to the complete disintegration of the Russian Empire .
 The period 1800-1914 saw a clear shift in the centre of economic gravity from the Urals to the Ukraine and Poland . Overall, the period 1800 -1914 was the period of economic growth in the Ukraine, Poland and Ukraine .
 During the years of revolution, 1905-7, urban revolt was widespread across European Russia, with strikes and armed uprisings . The revolution was a period of urban revolt across Europe .
 Revolts also took place in large cities in Siberia and Central Asia, where there was a substantial Russian or Ukrainian population . Russia and Ukraine were among the most prominent cities in the region .
 Rural revolt was most intense in the Ukraine and to the south of Moscow . In provinces where land was held in common by peasants, land was redivided every 20 years according to family size .
 This led to a strongly developed sense of community, making the peasants sympathetic to socialist revolutionary agitators . The Witipy mutiny was a major uprising in the early 1900s .
 Like so many pioneering journeys in the West, it relied heavily on the local knowledge of Native Americans . The journey was made with the help of Native American guides .
 Sacajawea a Shoshone woman who had lived with the Mandan was particularly valuable to the venture as a translator . Sacawawea, a woman from the Shoshon tribe, was a translator for the project .
 American pioneers moved inexorably westwards across the Appalachian Mountains in search of good farmland and new opportunities .
 Millions of acres of new territory came under U.S. control to form the transcontinental nation that we recognize today .
 This enormous landmass was swiftly occupied by settlers, and as these new areas gained large populations they were admitted to the Union as states . The new areas were admitted as states, and were later admitted to states .
 Its territory was subsequently enlarged in two great expansionist movements . Its territory has since been enlarged in the past .
 Thomas Jefferson bought a great swathe of the Midwest from France in 1803 for a meagre $15 million . Jefferson bought the land from France for the equivalent of $15million .
 The ‘Louisiana Purchase’, as it was known, instantly doubled the size of the United States . The “Louisiana purchase” was known as the Louisiana Purchase . The Louisiana Purchase was the largest purchase of all the American colonies .
 West Florida was annexed in 1813, while under the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, Spain ceded all of East Florida to the United States . Spain gave up its claim to territory north of the 42nd parallel in the Pacific northwest .
 The second wave of expansion involved the acquisition of Texas, Oregon and California .
 In 1835 American settlers in Texas staged a successful revolt against Mexican rule, winning the Battle of San Jacinto in 1836 . The Republic of Texas was born .
 As each new territory was colonized by settlers and a viable government formed, it became eligible for admission to the Union as o state and entitled to representation in Congress .
 For many years, Britain had contested America’s claims to the Oregon Country . The Oregon Country was the site of the Oregon State .
 At the beginning of the 19th century part of the impetus to venture west came from the desire to increase trade not only with the Native Americans but also with Asia . Explorers of the West .
 Settlement took place in a number of States caused by political and economic stages, often as a result of the displacement developments . Reports from the expedition of Lewis and Clark provided valuable information about the natural wealth of the United States .
 Many European economic migrants also became American pioneers the West . Many European migrants became Americans .
 Zebulon Pike explored the sources of the Mississippi and visited Colorado and New Mexico . Stephen Long investigated lands near the Red and Arkansas rivers . Stephen H Long explored lands near Arkansas and Red rivers .
 Government agents, traders and fur trappers, such as Jedediah Smith, travelled extensively between Missouri and the Pacific .
 The Santa Fe Trail was opened between New Mexico and Missouri in 1821 . "mountain men" hunted in the Rockies in the 1820s, spread word of the riches to be found there .
 War of 1812 against Britain led many people to travel westwards to find new agricultural land . Many people overcame their fear of opposition from Native Americans and travelled west .
 Most of the first settlers were southerners who had been displaced by the growth of the plantation system with its slave labour force .
 By 1830 their settlements filled southern Indiana and Illinois and overrunning Missouri . By 1830 they had overran southern Indiana, Illinois and Illinois .
 By 1840 almost all the Old Northwest had been carved into states . In the following decade newcomers from the northeast settled around the Great Lakes .
 Many pioneers had also moved into the newly acquired territory of Florida and into the land bordering the Gulf of Mexico .
 Most settlers here came from the southeast looking for fields where they could grow cotton . Most settlers came to the area to grow cotton, but most were moved to the southeast .
 Small farmers had been followed by large-scale planters, who brought slaves to the region . The majority of the slaves were brought from the eastern states .
 Once settlers had occupied the entire area, pioneers began to push beyond the Mississippi . Pioneers began to move beyond the river .
 Many Americans believed in ‘manifest destiny’, the idea that America was destined by God and by history to expand its boundaries over the whole of North America .
 The discovery of gold in California in 1848 led to settlement in California . This early trickle of settlement was hugely accelerated by the discovery of the first gold in America .
 More than 100,000 ‘Forty-Niners’ poured into California during gold fever . Gold fever swept the nation when gold fever hit California .
 Although relatively few found gold, many stayed on as farmers and shopkeepers . Many stayed on to become shopkeepers after finding gold .
 Utah settled not by profit-seeking adventurers but by Mormons searching for an isolated site where they could freely worship without persecution . Utah was settled by Mormons seeking to find a place to worship freely in Utah . Utah is now a state of its own .
 The journey of the Mormons to the shores of Great Salt Lake in 1847 was one of the best-organized migrations in history . The Mormons' journey to Utah was the most organized and organized migration of all its kind .
 Much of the West remained unsettled even after the frontier reached the Pacific Ocean . The frontier continued to be unsettled until the end of the frontier .
 After the war ranchers and farmers occupied the Great Plains west of the Mississippi . Part 4 Mountains and the Sierra Nevada, and after the war, they occupied the area .
 Cattle ranching on the open ranges involved driving herds over long distances along recognized trails . The cattle herd was driven to the railhead and on to market .
 Homestead Act of 1862 encouraged farmers to move from the east onto free or lowcost land . The pastures became exhausted, and farmers moved to the east on free land . Homestead act of 1862 allowed farmers to leave for free land in 1862 .
 The settlers enclosed the pasture lands, barring the roving cattle herds . They enclosed the land, barring roving herds .
 Settlement of the West largely brought an end to the traditional way of life of the Native Americans . Settlement of Westerners largely brought end to traditional way-of-life .
 Farmers occupied and fenced in much of the land, and white settlers moving west slaughtered buffalo herds . Native Americans depended on buffalo herds on which many Native Americans survived .
 At the same time, the federal government pushed more and more Native Americans onto reservations . At the time, Native Americans were pushed onto reservations, the government pushed reservations .
 In the short period of one century, the United States expanded from being an infant rural nation confined to the Atlantic coast to a transcontinental powerhouse, with a large rural and industrial population . The U.S. grew from being a small rural nation to a large and industrial powerhouse .
 This territorial expansion occurred at a phenomenal speed and settlement proceeded rapidly . Settlement proceeded rapidly, despite formidable physical and human obstacles . The settlement proceeded quickly, despite obstacles such as physical, human obstacles.
 Having established its own internal empire from the Atlantic to the Pacific, the USA was now in a position to challenge European supremacy on the world stage . The USA now has its own own internal .
 Alternative overland routes were established by pioneers seeking land or gold, and by surveyors looking for railroad routes . Alternative routes established by early settlers and surveyors .
 During the 18th century the Delaware Native Americans made a slow westward migration . In 1830 the Indian Removal Act also forced the southern tribes westward .
 Demands by white settlers for more land led to the establishment of Indian reservations and a series of bloody conflicts . White settlers demanded more land for more than a century .
 The Union was able to muster many more troops than the Confederacy, and suffered a smaller proportion of casualties . ZOO CONFEDERATE; TgJd otto repined 300,000 .
 Overall, 20 per cent of soldiers in the Civil War died as a result of disease . The majority of them were killed by disease . Overall, the majority of the soldiers died from disease .
 Four of the Union states Delaware, Maryland, Missouri and Kentucky permitted slavery . The issue of slavery prompted the Southern states to secede from the Union .
 The American Civil War was fought between the Northern states and the Southern states . Northern states wanted to maintain the United States of America as one nation . The Southern states had seceded to form their own nation .
 The causes of the war included the longstanding disagreements over slavery and its expansion into the new territories . North and South fought over economic disparities and the division of power between the two states .
 Slavery had been a marginal issue in the founding of the Republic . abolitionists began to attack this Southern institution in the early 19th century .
 The Missouri Compromise of 1820 forbade slavery in the Louisiana Purchase north of 36° 36"", many thought slavery would die out as the tobacco industry declined .
 After 1830, the opening up of virgin lands in the Deep South to the cotton economy suddenly enhanced the value of slave labour . After 1830s, the ever-increasing demand of European textile mills for raw cotton, increased the value .
 The sectional divide American politics began to divide according to sectional interests, focusing on the status of slavery in the new western territories . American politics was divided by sectional interest in slavery .
 Compromise of 1850 forbade slavery in California . Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 opened up these two territories to slavery leading to much violence in Kansas .
 The issue of slavery came to the forefront during the presidential election of 1860 . It was the first time slavery was considered a major issue in American history .
 The Republican candidate, Abraham Lincoln, was hostile to slavery and opposed its extension to new territories . Lincoln had pledged not to interfere with it where it already existed . Abraham Lincoln was the Republican candidate .
 Following his election as President in 1860, South Carolina immediately seceded from the Union . The decision followed by Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas .
 These seven states formed the independent Confederate States of America early in 1861 . They would be joined by four more states (Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee and Arkansas) once war was declared .
 Cotton production expanded to meet an increased demand from the rapidly industrializing countries of western Europe . They were considered vital to the profitability of cotton production .
 The outbreak of war War broke out on 12 April 1861 when Southern forces opened fire on federal-owned Fort Sumter .
 Lincoln took this as a declaration of war . Argued that secession was illegal and that the Union must be preserved . Lincoln argued that this was an illegal act .
 The Confederacy won some early victories in 1861-62, successfully repelling Union attempts to capture their capital at Richmond, Virginia .
 The Union was forced to disband its militia in favour of a new army of 500,000 volunteers in 1861 . The new army was formed in response to the defeat at the First Battle of Bull Run .
 As the war progressed, both sides introduced conscription to raise troops . Both sides were forced to introduce conscription as a result of the war .
 Union forces were successful in their attempt to seize control of the Mississippi, culminating in the capture of New Orleans, the largest city and most important port in the Confederacy .
 Confederate attempt to invade Maryland in September 1862 was thwarted at the Battle of Antietam . The Confederate attempt was thwarted by the battle at Antietom, Maryland .
 President Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation on 1 January 1863, freeing all slaves in the Confederacy . This encouraged President Lincoln to sign the Proclamation .
 The Proclamation helped break down opposition to recruitment of African-American soldiers . Freedom for the slaves took place gradually as the Union armies moved southwards .
 By the war’s end, 186,000 of them had served in Union armies, albeit in segregated regiments under the command of white officers . At vastly reduced levels of pay, they served at vastly reduced rates of pay .
 As the war progressed, the Union’s greater manpower and superior economic and industrial resources began to prevail . The Union's greater manpower began to win the war .
 The Union victory at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania in July 1863 proved to be the major turning point of the Civil War .
 The Confederacy was never strong enough again to undertake another major offensive . The Confederacy never had a strong enough to undertake a major offensive.
 The next day the Confederate garrison of Vicksburg, Louisiana, surrendered . The Confederate garrison had been besieged by the Unionists since mid-May . The Unionists had been fighting for control of the city since May .
 The Confederacy was split in two, with Union troops controlling the Mississippi . Union troops took control of the Mississippi, taking control of both sides of the river .
 Second half of 1863 saw further decisive battles in the west in the Tennessee campaign . Confederate forces were driven back into Georgia after being driven into Georgia .
 In 1864, the Union implemented two simultaneous campaigns . The campaigns were held simultaneously in 1864 .
 The first, centred on Virginia, saw some of the fiercest fighting of the war . No real victory for either side, although this war of attrition gradually depleted the Confederates .
 In the second Union campaign Atlanta was captured, followed by General Sherman s “scorched earth” march through Georgia to Savannah and then north through the Carolines, which caused much devastation and famine in its wake . Wilmington, the Confederate's last remaining seaport, was
 At the outset of the war, the Confederacy had believed that the demand from Britain and France for cotton would force them to enter the war on its behalf .
 As the war progressed, the two countries decided not to risk intervention for a losing cause . The two countries have been involved in the conflict in Afghanistan .
 The Confederate General Robert E Lee was forced to evacuate Petersburg and Richmond, and surrender to General Ulysses 8. 8. Lee surrendered to Ulysse 8.8 .
 At Appomattox Court House in 1865, President Grant declared the end of the Civil War . Grant's victory in the war effectively ended the war in 1865 .
 Confederate forces laid down their arms in May . By the end of May, the last Confederate forces had laid their arms .
 Civil War was the first “modern” war . Civil War saw the Civil War as the first modern war .
 It was fought by mass citizen volunteer and conscript armies, rather than by professional soldiers . The war was won by a mass citizen army rather than a professional army . It is now being fought by citizen volunteer armies .
 Railroads played a crucial role in the movement of troops and raw materials . Telegraphs were used in military communication as well as for virtually immediate Press reporting .
 The war also saw the first use of rudimentary iron-clad battleships, machine-guns, trench systems and dugouts .
 The Civil War was fought at the cost of enormous loss of life . It had the ultimate effect of preserving the United States of America as one nation .
 The Civil War brought many economic benefits to the North, under whose leadership the U.S. had developed* by the end of the century, into the world's greatest industrial power .
 The Union side devised the ""Anaconda Plan* by which They first encircled the Southern slates by land and »n, and then split them up by seizing (antral of ihe Mississippi River in the spring of 1863 and marching through Georgia in the winter of 18
 Hard-surfaced roads, known as turnpikes, were laid down in New England and the mid-Atlantic states . The earliest manifestation of this development was the laying down of hard-surfacing roads . Turnpikes were laid in the early 1900s .
 During the ‘Turnpike Era’ (1790-1820) more than 3,200 kilometres of road were constructed . The Lancaster Pike between Philadelphia and Lancaster, Pennsylvania, was the earliest being the Lancaster Pike .
 The most famous turnpike, the government-financed National Road, had crossed the Appalachian Mountains from Maryland to Virginia by 1818 . It reached Illinois by 1838 .
 Roads provided an early stimulus to economic development and westward expansion . These roads provided early economic development .
 Steamboats stimulated the agricultural economies of the Midwest and the south by providing quick access to markets for their produce at greatly reduced prices . Manufacturers in the east to send their finished goods westwards .
 The first half of the 19th century also witnessed widescale building of canals . The canals were built in the early years of the century . Canals were also built in Amsterdam and Amsterdam .
 The first railroad was opened between Baltimore (which funded the project) and Ohio in 1830 .
 5,324 kilometres of track had been laid by 1840 a figure which trebled over the next ten years . Other cities followed Baltimore’s example, with the markets of Ohio, Indiana and Illinois in mind .
 The introduction of the telegraph in 1837 further enhanced the speed of communication . It was the first time a telegraph was used to send messages from the world .
 Domestic U.S. manufacturing began to flourish when imports were scarce during the War of 1812 against Britain .
 These early forms of manufacturing were concentrated in the east and mainly processed the products of American farms and forests . Early forms of American manufacturing concentrated in east and west .
 The country benefited from a large and expanding labour force, which also provided a vast domestic market for industrial goods . In addition, the country also had a large domestic market of industrial goods.
 By 1860 its population had reached 31. million, exceeding that of Britain . By 1860, the population of the country had exceeded that of the UK .
 In 1860 American industry was still largely undeveloped . Industrialization after the Civil War was still a relatively unknown industry .
 Hand-crafting remained widespread and there was insufficient capital for business expansion . Most industrial operations were small in scale, hand-crafts remained widespread . Handcrafting was widespread, but there was not enough capital for expansion .
 This situation changed fundamentally after the Civil War . The rapid development of new technologies and production processes changed the situation after the war .
 Machines replaced hand-crafting as the main means of manufacturing . U.S. productivity increased at a rapid and unprecedented rate .
 Industrial growth was chiefly centred on the north, while the south largely remained an agricultural region . Industrial growth in the north was mainly centred around the north and south .
 Mass immigration, coupled with natural growth, caused the population to more than double between 1870 and 1910 to reach 92 million . Natural growth, combined with immigration, led to the population doubling to 92 million in 1910 .
 In the late 19th century mass industrialization was stimulated by a surge in technological innovation and improved factory production methods, enabling goods to be produced faster and more cheaply than ever before .
 The typewriter was introduced in 1867, followed by the cash register and the adding machine . It was the first typewriter to be introduced to the typewriter . The cash register was introduced by 1867 .
 Electricity was first used as a power source in the 1870s . International telegraph cables and the invention of the telephone assisted communication in the latter part of the century .
 Railroad-building also increased at a dramatic rate, providing a great stimulus to coal and steel production . Railroads rivalled the steamboat and canal barge as a means of transportation .
 The highly profitable railroads provided the model for the development of the modern corporations that financed and directed this great industrial expansion .
 Enterprises were increasingly consolidated into large-scale units, often monopolies, owned by limited liability shareholders . In order to eliminate cut-throat competition between companies, enterprises were increasingly consolidated into large scale units .
 The federal government helped to create an entrepreneurial climate in which business and trade could flourish without undue hindrance . The government helped create a business climate for entrepreneurs in the U.S.
 By the end of the 19th century, the United States was transformed from an essentially agrarian economy into a country in which half of its now culturally diversified population lived in its evergrowing cities .
 Britain had replaced Britain as the world’s leading industrial power . It was thus set to dominate the global economy in the 20th century .
 The pattern of migration to the U.S. was influenced portly by political and economic developments in Europe .
 Before the 1890s most immigrants came from northern and western Europe . Most came from Ireland following the Potato Famine in the 1840s and from Germany .
 By 1900 the majority of migrants were from central and eastern Europe, Russia and Italy . By 1900, migrants were mainly from central Europe, central and east Europe .
 The creation of the United States of America had signi/leant repercussions for Canada . It defined the Ganadian-Ameriean border (with Britain giving up all laud south of the Great Lakes) but also fundamentally altered the composition of Canada’s population .
 Between 40,000 and 60,000 Americans who remained loyal to the British crown flooded into Canada during and after the war . The kiss of the Thirteen Colonies encouraged Britain to tighten its rule over its North American possessions .
 Constitutional Act of 1791 divided Quebec into two parts English-speaking Upper Canada and French-speaking, largely Catholic, Lower Canada dominated by a British governor and an appointed legislative council .
 There were also significant English-speaking pockets in Lower Canada . The dominant merchant class in Montreal and farmers in the eastern townships .
 Repeated American invasions were repelled in the War of 1812 . Canadian independence was further secured after repeated invasions by the U.S.
 Canada's survival as an independent country ultimately depended on population growth and economic development . The country's survival depended on its economic growth and population growth . Canada's population grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s .
 In the east, internal communications were improved in the first half of the 19th century through the construe* tion of roads and canals . In the eastern part of the world, communications were also improved through roads and canal systems .
 Simon Fraser and David Thompson were the two most successful fur traders in Canada . Hudson's Bay Company also controlled vast tracts in the northeast of the country .
 Since the 17lh century French-speaking Canadians had largely settled along the 5) St. Lawrence River .
 In the 18th century territorial rivalry between the French and British in North America gradually increased, coming to a head in the Seven Years War of 1756-63 . Although the British initially suffered defeats, their troops rapidly gained the upper hand .
 Canadian discontent with oligarchic rule led to two short rebellions in both Upper and Lower Canada in 1837 and 1838 . Britain reassess how best to keep Canada within the empire and how to unite the French and English Canadians .
 The resulting Act of Union of 1840 combined Upper and Lower Canada into the new Province of Canada . By 1848 Canadians had gained a degree of self-government . Canada was the first country to become self-governable .
 Canada West and Canada East (formerly Upper and Lower Canada respectively) had equal representation in the province’s legislative assembly . Under this system, only Canada West had representation in Canada East and Canada West .
 This did little to ensure national unity and encouraged political stalemate . Further problems arose after 1850, when the population of Canada West exceeded that of Canada East .
 During the 1850s and 1860s, calls grew to replace this ineffectual union with some form of federal government by which each part of Canada could control its own affairs while a central government protected national defence and common interests .
 After conferences in Charlottetown and Quebec, the British North America Act was signed by Queen Victoria in 1867 . Queen Victoria signed the act in response to opposition to it .
 This act created the largely self-governing federation or Dominion of Canada under the British crown . It was created by the Act of Canada in 1903 . Canada's constitution is based on the British parliamentary system .
 It initially comprised only four provinces, with a population of 3. million people . Only 100,000 of whom lived west of the Great Lakes lived west .
 The driving ambition of the ‘Fathers of the Confederation’ was to unite all of the remaining British colonies in North America in order to achieve the economic and social development necessary for a viable nation .
 In 1870 the government vastly extended Canadian territory by purchasing Rupert's Land from the Hudson’s Bay Company . The company retained its trading station and forts, it gave up its monopoly of the area .
 The province of Manitoba was created in the same year, following the Red River Rebellion by settlers of mixed French and Native American ancestry, led by the metis Louis Riel .
 Similar financial incentives enabled Prince Edward Island to become the seventh province in 1873, although Newfoundland remained a proud self-governing colony until 1949 .
 The Canadian government actively promoted immigration from the British Isles and the U.S. and the United States . In the end of the century, immigration from central and eastern Europe also changed the cultural mix of Canada’s population .
 The new settlers moved primarily to unoccupied lands on the prairies . This enabled the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan to be created .
 In 1912 the remaining parts of the former Hudson’s Bay Company lands were added to Quebec, Ontario and Manitoba . In 1912, the remaining lands of Hudson's Bay Company were added .
 The situation reached crisis point when, in 1917, the Canadian parliament introduced conscription . It was the first time conscription had been introduced in Canada .
 55,000 Canadians lost their lives fighting for the empire in the First World War led ultimately to the transformation of Canada into a fully independent sovereign nation under the Statute of Westminster in 1931 .
 As the population grew in the newly settled territories, provinces were created and federated to the central government in Ottawa . The provinces are now federated into one nation .
 In 1912 Manitoba and Ontario were greatly enlarged to the north, with the annexation of land from the Northwest Territories . The annexation was part of the expansion of Manitoba, Ontario and Manitoba .
 Newfoundland was enlarged at the expense of Quebec in 1927 . Nunavut Territory administered by its majority Inuit inhabitants was created in 1999 .
 The French had taken control of Santo Domingo from the Spanish but were to lose it in 1809 . The French lost control of the city to the Spanish .
 They had already lost the colony of Saint Domingue in 1804, when it became independent Haiti . The colony was already lost to Haiti in the early 1800s .
 The Spanish territory was rich in minerals and included Potosi, the silver-mining capital of the world . Its resources were by now on the verge of being exhausted, but it is now exhausted .
 25 years later all of Spain's mainland American colonies would be independent republics . Few people, either in Europe or the Americas, could have anticipated this 25 years ago .
 Several colonial rebellions had occurred during the late 18th century, but they had all been defeated, and should not be interpreted as antecedents of independence . Several colonial incidents occurred during the 18th century, but all were defeated .
 In 1780 a creole revolt against Spanish tax increases was superseded by an antiSpanish rebellion among the American Indians . Tupac Amaru led the anti-Spanish rebellion in 1780, led by Tupac amaru .
 The small minority of creoles jettisoned their own protest in favour of helping the colonial authorities to suppress this revivalist Inca movement at the cost of 100,000 lives . The creoles’ fear of the African, Indian and mixed-race peoples, who made up
 A slave revolt in Saint Domingue in 1791 led to the founding of Haiti, the first African-Caribbean republic in the Americas, in 1804 . This rationale was strengthened after a slave revolt led to Haiti's founding of the French colony in the French Caribbean colony of
 Most creoles calculated that their interests ultimately depended on Spain, despite an expanding list of grievances against the mother country . Spain is one of the world's most populous countries .
 It was not until Napoleon invaded Spain in 1808, and installed Joseph Bonaparte in place of the Bourbon King Ferdinand, that some creoles began to reconsider their options . Some creoles considered leaving Spain in the 18th century .
 During this time Jose de San Martin, aided by Bernardo O'Higgins, had been liberating Chile . During the war, San Martin helped liberate Chile . The war ended in defeat .
 San Martin travelled north to take Lima and attempt to liberate what was to become Peru . Leaving O'Higgins behind as president of the new state of Chile, San Martin took Lima .
 In 1822 he was forced to seek help from Bolivar, and in September 1822 retired from command . He was forced into exile in 1822 .
 Bolivar completed the liberation of Peru at the Battle of Junin . He completed the capture of the Peruvian capital at the battle .
 In this he was aided by Antonio Jose de Sucre, who went on to win the final battle against the Spanish at Ayacucho in 1824 . In this battle he was helped to defeat the Spanish, winning the battle in the same way .
 Bolivar returned to Colombia but was unable to hold together the republic he had created . In 1830 (the year of his death) it broke up into the three modern-day states of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador .
 Part 4 authorities that rapidly developed in resistance to French rule in the name of Ferdinand; or [o establish autonomous ruling authorities]. Part 4: Authorities that rapidly . developed in . resistance to . French rule under the name Ferdinand; . or . established autonomous . authorities .
 Spanish Americans were unable to exploit legally what they perceived as lucrative trading opportunities in the British and U.S. markets . Spain's commercial monopoly had been tightened up, and Spanish Americans couldn't exploit legally .
 A new system of colonial administration had been introduced that interfered with well-established informal mechanisms for allocating power and resources within Spanish American societies .
 Bourbon absolutism aimed to strengthen the position of pen insularcs at the expense of Spanish Americans . Spanish Americans were not allowed to live in the United States .
 By the end of the 18th century, creoles accounted for a far smaller proportion of the upper levels of the colonial bureaucracy than in 175(1) century .
 There was a growing sense among elite creoles in Spanish America that their interests might best be served hv selfgovernment . The United States became an independent republic in the 19th century .
 This redefinition of their position was enhanced by an incipient sense of national identity that it ad been developing within creole communities throughout the 18th century . The idea of being distinct from Spaniards hut also from each other .
 The political ideas of the French Enlightenment were probably less influential in the development of independence movements than was once thought . Some of their leaders, notably the Venezuelan, Simbn Bolivar, were certainly of importance to some of them .
 Spanish Americans first declared, and then fought for their independence . The battles between republicans and royalists remained evenly balanced until events in Spain during 182H-21 provided the final catalyst to the creation of a political consensus among creoles .
 Spanish liberalism became widespread throughout Spanish America with the exception of Peru, where menu fries of the Tupac Amaru rebellion remained vivid .
 Peru was eventually liberated in 1824 by Bolivar’s troops, after the retreat of the Spanish had been initiated by an invasion from the south led by the Argentine Jnsede lS^o Martfn . By 1828 the last royalist troops had been expelled from
 The decolonization of Spanish America was even more attributable to events in Europe than was the decoloration of Spain . However, in overall terms, it was more likely to be attributed to Europe than Spain's decolonialization .
 The Portuguese monarchy implemented milder versions of the Bourbon reforms in the late 18th century . The local elite played a far greater role in governing Brazil than their counterparts in Spain’s colonics .
 This represented a shift in political power from Portugal to Brazil which was to prove i rreversi hie. Portugal was to become the most powerful country in Latin America .
 Brazil was unique in that it won its independence largely without the damaging consequences of civil war and economic collapse that occurred elsewhere in the region . Brazil's independence came largely without a civil war or economic collapse .
 In Spanish America mineral production plummeted to less than a quarter of its level before its independence struggles, industrial output declined by two-thirds, and agriculture hv half .
 The corporate institutions of Spanish colonialism remained intact, the Church remained strong, and militarism was strengthened . The military was strengthened by Spain's colonialist policies .
 Creoles simply took over the property abandoned by fleeing Spaniards and established themselves as a new oligarchy . Creoles regarded the masses with at least as much disdain as their Spanish predecessors had done .
 Simon Bolivor wrc instrumental in lb liberation of much of South America . Spunbh ruled much of the South American continent .
 He failed in his attempts la hold together ibe RepuWk of Gran Colombia, and disci dniNcrtionededed .
 Argentina last ihe folk land Islands to ihe Brilish in 1833, hut secured T he newly independent republics ut Spanish America faced formidable challenges .
 Spain was too weak to do much beyond defending its remaining colonial possessions . Spain fought two wars over Cuban independence before U.S. intervention in 1898 led to the Spanish-American War .
 It was briefly ruled by the Austro-Hungarian, Maximilian von Habsburg* as emperor supported by French troops . Britain had colonies in Guiana and British Honduras, and eonsolh dated its commercial and financial dominance throughout most of the region .
 Throughout the 19th century Latin American economics remained dependent on the export of raw materials . Although there has been considerable debate about the wisdom of this policy* in practice they had little choice .
 colonial powers had left behind scant basis for the creation of self-sufficient economies* and independent states did not have die resources necessary’ for such development . Attempts were made to encourage industrialization in Mexico* Colombia and Brazil in the 1830s and 1840s* but they all succumbed
 The export of primary products brought considerable wealth to Latin America* especially once the development of steamships and railways in the 1860s had modernized transportation . Latin American economies were able to benefit from the overall expansion in the world economy fuelled by European and United States demands for raw materials and
 Latin America was produeing 18 per cent of the world's cereals in the eve of the First World War . Latin American elites in what became known as “la belle gpoque” of Latin American development .
 Peru and Bolivia last mil lo Chile in the Yfor ol The Paiifk fa 1879 . surrendering territory rich in nitrates and, in Bolivia, an aullef la the sea .
 Politics in 19th-century Latin America was entirely an elite affair, with electoral contests typically involving at most ten per cent of the population .
 Most of the republics had adopted liberal constitutions based on that of the United States . These were to prove an inadequate blueprint for the authoritarian reality of Latin American politics .
 The major challenge in most countries was to consolidate central state authority over remote and often rebellious areas . Most countries faced the challenge of consolidating central authority in remote and rebellious areas.
 Until well into the 1850s local leaders known as caudillos raised armies to fight for their interests . They held sway over their followers by a combination of charisma and blandishment .
 In these circumstances, many liberal statesmen found themselves obliged to pursue distinctly illiberal policies . This is particularly true in the case of Russia, Russia and Ukraine .
 As the century wore on, Latin American liberalism took on an increasingly conservative cast . Liberalism came to power in most Latin American countries during the 1850s and 1860s .
 One distinctive legacy of liberalism was an appreciable reduction in the wealth of the Catholic Church, particularly in Mexico . Liberalism did not succeed in diminishing the religious devotion of the majority of the population .
 Conditions barely improved for the Latin American masses . Conditions in Latin America barely improved . Social changes barely improved in Latin American countries .
 American Indians had good reason to feel that their plight had been less onerous under colonial rule, when they had at least enjoyed a degree of protection from the Spanish crown against encroachments .
 The attempts of liberal governments to turn Indian peasants into smallholders by forcibly redistributing their lands left most Indians worse off, particularly those in Mexico .
 Slavery was abolished in Central America as early as 1824 and in Spanish South American republics during the 1850s . But it continued in Portuguesedominated Brazil, where a weak emperor was reluctant .
 Brazil did not pass legislation to end the trade in slaves until 1850 . It took until 1888 the year before Brazil declared itself a republic for slavery itself to be abolished .
 Many former slaves had little choice but to join a floating rural proletariat, subject to seasonal work in exchange for pitiful wages . Even in conditions of allegedly ‘free’ labour, however, the lack of alternative work meant many former slaves were forced to join .
 During the middle part of the 19th century the populations of most Latin American countries more than doubled . By the end of the century Latin America’s integration into the world economy was beginning .
 Urbanization, industrialization and their consequences continued from the 1880s onwards . Urbanization and industrialization continued to be the result of the industrialization boom .
 The 19th century saw large population their numbers between 1820 and 1880, increases in most Latin American countries . Many countries experienced a doubling of successful Argentina quadrupled on professionals and bureaucrats .
 Trade unions among the working classes most of which were organized by European immigrants to Argentina or Brazil first became active during this period . Public education programmes were initiated in the larger countries .
 It was not until after the First World War, however, that the political consequences of all these socio-economic changes were to manifest themselves . The political consequences were to be seen after the Second World War .
 I045*US Q cotton [W1 Coded lB4i 1050 m henequen I | Ceded hy Tnoaty of Guadalupe Mddgu 184B Ceded 1853 l&scbden Pufrfwsel 1829 Dole
 It lost Texas to an independence movement in 1836 and California, New Mexico and Arizona after being defeated in the 1846-48 war with the U.S. It lost California to independence in 1837 and lost New Mexico in the war with America in 1848 .
 Further territory ceded in 1850 and again in 1853, as a result of the Gadsden Purchase . Further territory was ceded by the U.S. following the purchase .
 The smaller islands remained European colonies, while the United States retained control of Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico was the last European colony of the U.S.
 ThK gave I he Company control of territories that remaned formotfy under the rule of Indian princes . Company took control of Indian territories that were remanitified under Indian princes.
 The British army consisted mainly ol Indian Mm, known as sepoys, who themselves mutinied against British authority in 1857 . This is regarded in indta as the country's first war of independence .
 Surat in 1619 and followed by Madras in 1634, Bombay in 1674 and Calcutta in 1690 . It quickly established trading posts, known as ‘factories, in Surat and Madras .
 Company made most of its fortune from cotton textiles, whose manufacture was highly developed in India . Company originally entered the ‘Indies’ trade in pursuit of spices .
 Until the second quarter of the 18th century, there was little to suggest that the British presence in India heralded an empire . However, until the mid-18th century there were few signs of an empire in India .
 The turning point, which was to lead to British supremacy in India, came in the mid-18th century . The Mughal Empire began to break up into warring regional states, whose needs for funds and armaments provided opportunities for Europeans to exploit .
 The growing importance of the English East India Company’s lucrative trade eastwards towards China, enhanced its importance in the Indian economy, especially in Bengal . Another factor was the growing importance  of the lucrative trade .
 The French and British began a struggle for supremacy that was not resolved until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 . Conflicts between the European powers started to spill over into Asia .
 In southern India from 1746 the British and French backed rival claimants to the Nawabi of Arcot . In 1746, the French and British backed rival claims in southern India . The Nawabi was ruled by the British in 1746 .
 In the course of their conflict Robert Clive introduced new techniques of warfare borrowed from Europe . Clive rose from clerkship to command the English East India Company's armies .
 These not only prevailed against the French but opened up new possibilities of power in the Indian subcontinent . The French were defeated by the British in the 18th century .
 The defeat of the residual armies of the Mughal emperor at Buxar in 1764 completed this process . This created an opportunity for the conversion of the Company’s influence into political power .
 Political stability within the empire in India was achieved with no greater ease . Nor was political stability in the empire achieved with any greater ease. Nor was it ever achieved with ease .
 In 1857 the ‘Great Mutiny’ of Indian soldiers in the Bengal army saw the British lose control of the central Ganges Valley and face rebellion in the heartland of their empire . Most notably, in 1857, the British lost control in the central part of the
 The carrying forward of the imperial project in the face of so many problems was a reflection of the importance attached to India by the British .
 In the course of the 19th century it became ‘the jewel in the crown” of the British Empire . It was formally annexed in 1858 when the English East India Company was dissolved .
 The ropid growth of India's Toilway network was on important factor in the Transition from subsistence fornimg to fommefdol agriculture . The ropy growth was an important factor .
 As it became easier to transport produce from the countryside to the ports so ihe demands of the British market were able to be reflected in the crops grown in Britain .
 The supply of raw American cotton to the Lancashire cotton mills dried up during the American Civil War . Many Indian farmers switched ta cotton production from American cotton production to Indian cotton production .
 When the war ended and the mills reverted ta American cation, the Indian market collapsed, leaving farmers unable to return la food production .
 Its most significant role was to supply a large army which was extensively used for imperial defence around the world . It was used to supply many of the world's most important armies .
 What effects British rule had on India remains a controversial question . The British rule of India was ruled by the British during the early 1900s .
 The agricultural economy grew, with expanding foreign trade and British capital providing the rudiments of a modern transport infrastructure . British capital provided the basic infrastructure for the first time .
 Once-great textile industry declined and few other industries rose to take its place . However, the once-great industry declined .
 A strong imperative, especially from the 1840s onwards, was to ‘civilize’ India along Western lines, introducing ‘scientific” education, a competitive market economy and Christian ethics .
 Conservative view held by some in the British administration in India warned against disturbing ‘native’ custom .
 After the Mutiny, such conservative counsels won out and were reinforced by a deepening British racism, which denied equal rights to Indian subjects of the British monarch . The Mutiny was the result of a growing British racism .
 Some traditional groups mounted a ferocious defence of their traditional rights . Others responded positively to what they regarded as modernizing trends, especially taking up Western education .
 For such groups, the racism of the late-Victorian British and their turning away from earlier liberal ideals proved disappointing and frustrating . The late Victorian British turned away from previous liberal ideals .
 An Indian National Congress had been formed in 1885 to advance the cause of Indians within the empire . The Congress was formed by the Indian National Party to advance Indian interests .
 By the early 1900s it had already begun to reject the politics of loyalism and to express more fundamental objections . However, by the early . 1900s, it was already beginning to reject .
 As the shadow of the First World War fell across the Indian landscape, the British Empire was fast losing its claims to lead it through the 20th century .
 In 1920-22, shortly after the war, Mahatma Gandhi launched the first of the mass civil disobedience campaigns . The campaigns signalled the beginning of the end of British rule in India .
 Province Wellesley 11 BOD, Singapore (I819) and Melaka were ctwwlifuted (with the addition in 1846 of tnbuan in Borneo] as the Straits Settlements in IB26 r in order to service trade with Chino .
 Its conquests in lower Burma loflawing the Second Angb-Burmese War [113521 including Pegu and the seaports of Motlobon, Motlobeon, Berstein ond Rangoon were designed to protect India s eastern frontier
 The Dutch were able to expand along the east and west coasts of Sumotro . Meanwhile, the victory of the Dutch over Wnhhabi influenced Muslim ralonrars in western Sumatra in the Fodri War enabled them to undertake limited expansion .
 Britain's emergence as the leading commercial and seaborne pow er in the region confirmed after 1795 . Us naval forces, operating from Madras and Pinang in the Strait of Malacca, captured Dutch East India Company possessions .
 By 1815 Britain controlled Java and the Spice Islands . Soon established itself in Singapore (1819) and in Arakan and Tenasserim in Lower Burma following the First AngloBurmese War . Although Java was handed back to Holland in 1816, Dutch power in Indonesia remained
 Between 1762 and 1820s, total Bengal opium exports increased 1,500 per cent from 1,400 to 20,000 chests per annum . China's interest in Southeast Asia in this period was driven by its need to find trade goods saleable in Canton in exchange for
 This required Javanese peasants to grow cash crops (mainly sugar, coffee and indigo) for sale at very low prices to the colonial government . This required them to grow crops for sale to the government .
 An educated mixedrace Filipino-Spanish-Chinese elite, known as the ilustrados, began to challenge the political predominance of the Iberian-born friars and the Madrid-appointed colonial administrators . The Iberians were the seat of Spanish colonial authority since the late
 The existence of newly established dynasties and kingdoms, especially in mainland Southeast Asia, complicated the task of the European colonialists . Southeast Asian resistance was a major factor in European colonial efforts .
 From the mid-18th century onwards Burma, Siam and Vietnam had all experienced extensive political renewal under the leadership of new dynasties . Burma, Vietnam and Burma, all had experienced political renovation under new dynastships .
 This encompassed a revitalization of Theravada Buddhism and Confucianism . The subjugation of minority populations to new state-sponsored forms of culture, religion, language and governance .
 British annexation of Lower Burma between the 1820s and 1850s was to check expansionist policies of a succession of Konbaung monarchs . The principal reason for the British annexation was to stop the expansionist policy of the rulers .
 French involvement in Indochina began with capture of Da Nang in 1858 . French involvement was spurred by anti-Catholic pogroms initiated by Vietnamese emperor Minh-mang .
 The political and cultural self-confidence of the Southeast Asian rulers went hand in hand with rapid economic and demographic growth . Self-confidence was a key factor in the region's rapid economic growth .
 Aceh alone accounted for over half the world’s supply of pepper 9,000 tonnes by 1824 . Aceh was one of the most prolific pepper exporters in the world, supplying over half of world's supply .
 In the same period the region’s population more than doubled to over nine million . The region has also doubled to nine million in the last decade .
 Europeans began to move in force against the indigenous states of Southeast Asia after 1850, they encountered fierce resistance . This meant that when the Europeans moved in force, they faced fierce resistance.
 It took the Dutch 30 years to overcome Acehnese resistance, and when the British moved into Upper Burma in November 1885 and overthrew the Konbaung monarchy, it required another five years of sustained operations to ‘pacify’ the remaining guerrilla fighters .
 The energies unleashed by the emergence of indigenous resistance movements proved too much for the incumbent colonial administration . In the Philippines the energies unleashed .
 Three more years were to pass before the military forces of the Philippine Republic were finally subdued in a series of bitter campaigns which required the deployment of over 60,000 American troops . However, three more years later, the Philippines was finally subdued by the US .
 New Western-educated elites emerged to take their place, demanding political rights and recognition of what they saw as legitimate nationalist aspirations . Instead, new Western educated elites emerged, taking over from their predecessors . They demanded political rights, recognition and recognition for their aspirations .
 Between 1906 and 1908 the foundation of the Young Men’s Buddhist Association in Rangoon and the ‘Beautiful Endeavour’ organization of Javanese medical students in Batavia led to the development of more radical forms of nationalism .
 In Vietnam this took the form of the anti-French agitation of the ‘Confucian scholar activists’, such as Phan Ghu Trinh and Pham Boi Ghau . Both advocated the use of violence against the colonial state .
 Japan’s victory over tsarist Russia in 1904-5 had given the lie to the myth of Western superiority . Meanwhile, Japan's victory over Russia in 1905-1919 had given a lie to Western superiority.
 The fact that Western colonial authority rested for the most part on very small numbers of troops and armed police 42,000 for a population of 62 million in Indonesia made it vulnerable both to external attack and internal subversion .
 Rise of Japanese militarism during this period and emergence of well-organized Southeast Asian nationalist movements sounded its death knell . The rise of Japan militarism in this period was seen as a failure .
 The introduction by the colonialists of Western-style bureaucracies, education, capitalist means of production and communications systems led to the demise of older monarchical forms of authority . Western-educated, nationalist elites were the rise of nationalist elites .
 The British joined forces with ihe French in I B 56 to enoct hirthef concessions in the Second Opium Yfor . Not satisfied with the outcome, however, the British joined .
 India Company increased steadily, while Chinese exports remained fairly stalked . India Company Company increased .
 Opium imports grew during ibis period, leading the Chinese to impose restrictions and Ihe British lo use force in order to protect their market . Ihe value of opium imported more than doubled .
 Western traders soort found ways to get around the coining system . Smuggling was widely practised, and smuggling was widespread .
 The British discovered an ideal commodity to sell in China; opium . More importantly, the British discovered the opium .
 Most of South and Southeast Asia already colonized, (Ihina represented the final target in the Asian world. With most of South . and Southeast . Asia already . already . colonized . with most of . South and . Southeast Asia . already colonised .
 China had enjoyed sizeable surpluses in trade with the West since the 17th century . China exported increasing amounts of raw materials in particular tea, sugar and silk in the face of competition from Japan and India .
 China has become economically dependent on the West, as it has few precious metals and needed the inflow of silver from foreign trade to facilitate the expansion of its internal trade . However, it had also become economically reliant on the Western, and had few precious metal reserves .
 In 1760 the Manchu Qjng government had restricted the activities of foreign traders to just four ports, thus facilitating the collection of duties from these traders . The Manchu government had restrictions on foreign trade to four ports .
 Westerners attempted, hut failed, to persuade the Qing government to reform its restrictive policies . Westerners became dear that such policies could not he shaken off by peaceful means as long as Qing sovereignty remained intact .
 During the Taiping Rebellion the Qing revenues were used to support the rebels . The Qing revenues . During the . Taiping . Rebellion the . Qing revenues.
 Qing army largely lost control of much of China's most fertile region . The Qing army was largely unsuccessful against the rebels, which were region, resulting in a 70 per cent drop in tax .
 China’s hard-earned silver began to flow out in large quantities, causing severe deflation in the economy . The silver was used to fund the construction of the country's first skyscraper, a skyscraper .
 The Manchu Qing imposed a total ban on the opium trade in China . The Qing, who did not want to see the resulting loss of tax revenue, responded .
 This triggered the invasion, in 1840, of British gunships, against which the Qing armed forces proved to be no match . The Qing army proved no match against the British gunship in 1840s .
 The events of 1840 heralded the end of China's status as a world power in the 19th century . The events were the start of the Chinese revolution .
 British and French forces extracted further concessions from China in the Second Opium War in 1856-60 . The Russians annexed around 1 million square kilometres (386,000 square miles) of Chinese Siberia north of the River Amur .
 Chinese Empire's successive military and diplomatic defeats cost the Chinese Empire dearly in terms of growing trade deficits and of mounting foreign debts, mainly incurred by war reparations . The Empire suffered a series of defeats in the early 1900s and 1930s .
 Boxer Rebellion of 1899-1901 led to anti-foreign, anti-Christian Boxer rebellion . China remained technically independent, but its sovereignty was ruthlessly violated . Boxer uprising led to Boxer revolt in 1901-1902 .
 The Manchu Qing government used the support of the West for half a century . However, in the long term it proved a fatal strategy for the Qing dynasty .
 Western powers exercised their influence over large areas of the Chinese hinterland . Britain was granted a lease on the territory of Hong Kong and the Portuguese gained Macau . In order to ensure a constant supply of goods for trading, the Western powers also exercised influence .
 Only in the northeast, and in the province to the southwest of Beijing, were rebellions successfully put down by Qing troops . Only in China's northeast and southwest, only in China, were rebels put down .
 Emperor Xuantong abdicated, and control of Beijing passed to General Yuan Shikoi . Control of Beijing was temporarily suspended after the truce .
 The Nationalists subsequently established their capital in Nanjing . this time already spread across southeast and central China . The Chinese Nationalists established Nanjing in 1903 .
 Qing emperor signed a truce with rebels on 18 December, which stipulated his abdication and the elevation of his general, Yuan Shikai, to the position of President . Bowing to pressure from the Western powers, he signed the truce with the rebels .
 The independent provinces recognized Nanjing as their new capital, and elected the Nationalist leader Sun Yat-sen as provisional President on 1 January 1912 . He stepped down on 14 February in favour of Yuan Shikai .
 Hie feudal domains were obolbhed and replaced by tentrolly administered Honshu'’ HamamoNf^Hl2 T Japanese atqukrfkms in (he tme 19th Kdl and early 20th centuries)
 T he collapse of the Tokugawa regime in 1867 initiated a period of momentous change in Japan . Society, the economy and polities were transformed in the wake of the revolution .
 The new leaders believed that to achieve equality with the nations of the West, Japan had to pursue an aggressive foreign policy . For this it needed a viable and modern military capability, backed up by a modem industrial sector, he says .
 All this was done in the name of the emperor, who had been the focus of the anthugawa movement . The emperor was the focus .
 This system remained in place until 1945, with different groups dominant within it at different times . Different groups were dominant within the system until 1945 . This system was used by different groups throughout the world .
 Universal male suffrage was not granted until 1925, women were barred from political life, and there were draconian restrictions on labour activity as well as on ideologies and organizations deemed to be potentially subversive .
 The concept of the “family state"" was promoted, according to which the emperor said to be descended from ancient deities was the benevolent patriarch of the Japanese .
 Any criticism of the “emperor-given’s constitution was regarded as treason . Criticising the constitution was seen as treason.
 In their efforts to compete with the West, Japan’s leaders studied and imitated Western economies, borrowing ideas as they saw fit . Part 4: Modernization of the economy is part of the country's modernization .
 The legal and penal systems and the military were all remodelled along Western lines . The legal, penal and military systems were remodelled in the 1930s .
 A system of compulsory education was implemented from the turn of the century . A compulsory education system was implemented in the 1930s .
 Agricultural output increased substantially, but then levelled off from the First World War onwards . There was sustained growth in commercial agricultural products, especially silk cocoons . Silk cocoons were particularly important in silk production in China .
 Up to 1914 manufacturing remained largely focused on handicraft production of traditional products for the domestic market . This enabled capital accumulation for the growth of larger-scale, mechanized production . In turn, capital accumulation enabled growth of large-scale production .
 By the end of the Meiji period, factory-based silk reeling and cotton spinning were both major export industries . The first heavy industrial plants had been established .
 The First World War gave a major boost to manufacturing growth in 1918 . After 1918 the industrial structure was transformed in manufacturing .
 The relative contribution of agriculture to the Gross National Product had declined dramatically . Agriculture is a key part of the country's economic growth .
 Light industry (especially textiles), while remaining crucial in exports, had been gradually overtaken by heavy industry . The service sector had grown, and light industry had remained crucial . Light industry had grown but heavy industry had overtaken light industry .
 During the 1920s and 1930s some industrial sectors came to be dominated by business groupings called zaibatsu . The groupings controlled multiple enterprises and huge assets .
 Some zaibatsu came under fierce attack in the wake of the Depression, when falling prices and general instability brought agricultural crisis in some areas .
 Despite the growth of the Japanese economy in the 1930s, living standards were squeezed and the distribution of benefits was unequal . The distribution of the benefits in Japan was unequal, according to the OECD .
 One of the most pressing concerns of the new government was to rid the country of the ‘unequal treaties’ imposed on Japan by the Western powers towards the end of the Tokugawa period .
 treaties forcing Japan to open its ports to trade with the West had been an important contributory factor in the collapse of the Tokugawa regime . These treaties had been made by the West .
 Japan eventually achieved a revision of the treaties in 1894 . In 1902 an alliance was concluded with Britain .
 The Japanese victory gave Japan a foothold in Manchuria and the freedom to annex Korea as a colony in 1910 . Although the Japanese victory was less than clearcut, it gave Japan the freedom .
 In all its overseas territories, but particularly in Korea, Japanese rule was harsh . Japanese rule in Korea was harsh, especially in Korea .
 The League of Nations mandated the former German colonies of the Caroline, Marshall and Mariana islands to Japan after the First World War .
 In 1927 Japanese troops in Manchuria were involved in the murder of a leading warlord . In 1931 the Japanese army, acting initially without the sanction of Tokyo, occupied the territory . In the wake of the ‘incident’ in 1931, the Japanese Army, acting without
 Tension between Japan and China finally erupted into full-scale war in 1937 . Tensions between the two nations erupted into war in Japan .
 Russian losses of men and ships vastly exceeded those of the Japanese . As a result of this humiliation, the Russians conceded defeat in September 1905 .
 The nationalization of much of the railway system in 1906 more than trebled the extent of Japan's state-owned railway system .
 The rapid development of a railway network was one feature of the dramatic changes in transport and other parts of the infrastructure from the 1870s .
 In the mid-19th century explorers ventured into Australia's inhospitable interior . In the middle of the 19th century, explorers ventured to the region's rugged interior .
 Dieffenbach and Brunner both took Maori guides, who were largely responsible for the survival of the white men . In New Zealand, however, both men were taken by Maori guide guides .
 The history of both Australia and New Zealand predates the arrival of Europeans in the late 18th century .
 Australia had been inhabited by its Aboriginal population for around 60,000 years, while New Zealand had been home to the Polynesian Maori for around 1,00 years .
 In 1769-70, during his first Pacific voyage, James Cook charted the coast of New Zealand . He landed on the eastern coast of Australia, which he claimed for Britain . Cook claimed the eastern part of Australia for Britain in 1770 .
 As the land around Sydney was unsuitable for agriculture, the colony relied heavily on intermittent supplies of foodstuffs shipped out from England throughout the 1790s . The land around the Sydney area was not suitable for agriculture .
 In the early 1820s a route was developed to the inland plains and with access to vast expanses of pastoral land, newly arrived free settlers turned to sheep-rearing . The growing economy in Australia was confined to whaling, fishing and sealing .
 The wool they exported to Britain became the basis of Australia’s economy . Further colonies based on this trade were established over the next three decades in Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia and Queensland .
 The ever-increasing demand for pasture brought the settlers into conflict with the Aboriginal population . The settlers were forced to live with Aboriginal people .
 The settlers carried with them alien diseases such as smallpox and influenza . As well as seizing land and using violence against the Aborigines, the settlers also used violence against them .
 The development of overseas trade, dependent on coastal ports, and the expansion of mining industries helped to foster an increasingly urban society .
 Australia’s population grew dramatically from 405,000 in 1850 to 4 million by the end of the century . The population of Australia grew dramatically between 1850 and 1900s .
 The Australian colonies developed political systems based on that in Britain, and most became self-governing during the 1850s . Most of the colonies were self-governed during the 18th century .
 The creation of the Commonwealth of Australia in 1901 promoted freer trade between the states within this federation and facilitated a joint approach to defence . The Commonwealth was formed in 1901 and the federation was formed .
 One of the first measures taken by the Commonwealth was to adopt the ‘white Australia policy’, designed to exclude non-white immigrants . The policy was adopted by the Australian government in the 1930s .
 New Zealand was initially treated by the British as an appendage of New South Wales . White settlers in New Zealand were first to arrive in the country .
 Treaty of Waitangi in 1840 provoked decades of conflict between white settlers and Maori . The treaty, which gave sovereignty to Britain, was not clearly translated for Maori chiefs who agreed it . It only became a separate colony following the controversial Treaty .
 While the Maori population declined, the settler population grew dramatically during the second half of the 19th century . While the population of Maori decreased, the settlement population increased dramatically .
 Tension over land triggered the Maori Wars of 1860 to 1872, after which large areas of Maori land were sold or confiscated by the government . Tensions over land sparked Maori wars of 1860-1872 .
 Central parliament, including Maori representatives, was established in 1852 . New Zealand evolved quickly to responsible government, and a central parliament was established .
 By 1879, the country enjoyed almost universal male suffrage, and women obtained the vote in 1893 . Women were allowed to vote for the first time in 1879 .
 In 1907 New Zealand became, like Australia, a self-governing dominion within the British Empire . New Zealand's economy remained heavily dependent on British markets .
 Until the 1950s both Australia and New Zealand retained close political ties with Britain . They fought alongside Britain in the two world wars, fighting alongside each other .
 Britain’s inability to defend the region adequately during the Second World War led to the ANZUS Pact of 1951 . Britain and Australia entered into defensive arrangements with the United States .
 Swh Lultivaliun, however, t attributed to I be huge decline in the Aboriginal papulation . Swh . Lultiviun said there was a 'huge decline' in Aboriginal Papulation .
 These measures encouraged immigration and ted to o decline in ihe proportion of ihe population who were Maori . The trend was reversed somwhul after the 1930s .
 Economic ties with Britain also declined after 1945, especially after Britain joined the European Economic Community in 1973 .
 A cultural reawakening among the Maori was evident by the beginning of the 20th century (in the Katana movement), and Maori political campaigning began in earnest in the 1920s and 1930s . Political campaigning for Maori began in the 1930s and 1940s .
 It took another 20 years and further protests, however, lxjfore any land was returned to die Maori, most of whom inhabit North Island . Most of the land in New Zealand is occupied by Maori .
 Australia's Aborigines had begun to assert their identity and demand an end to discrimination during the 1930s . But it was not until 1967 that they won equal citizenship .
 The number of Aborigines is rising but they remain the most disadvantaged sector of Australian society . Federal authorities began to promote the return of land to Aboriginal communities in the 1970s .
 The city of Timbuktu served for centuries as a trading post for caravans . The city has been known for centuries for trading purposes .
 The Nortli African coastal region was firmly integrated into Mediterranean trading systems . Well-established transSaharan trading routes secured the dominance of Islam from the north coast to West Africa .
 Over 12 million slaves were despatched to the Americas between 1450 and 1870, of whom a quarter were exported during the 19th century . The Atlantic slave trade, initiated by the Portuguese in 16th century, became an increasing focus of economic activity .
 The political, social and economic reverberations of European competition for slaves along the west and central African Atlantic coast extended far into the interior . European competition between slaves and slaves in Africa extended into the continent's interior .
 Slaves exchanged for firearms, metal goods, beads, beads and other manufactured goods . Slaves were exchanged for weapons, metal and other goods .
 With the formal abolition of the slave trade in I NOT, ivory, rubber, palm oil, cloth, gold and agricultural products assumed greater importance as trading commodities .
 In East Africa trading activities were somewhat less dev eloped, as was urbanization and the formation of states . In East African trading activities, trading was less developed .
 Slave trade in this region remained relatively unaffected by its formal illegality until the latter part of the 19th century . The slave trade in the region was relatively unaffected until the mid-century .
 At the start of the 19th century the European presence hi Africa was largely restricted to the coastal regions of northern, western and southern Africa .
 Spain had been in con trol of the Moroccan ports of Ceuta and Mclilla since the 16th century . Spain has been in possession of the ports since then .
 British interests were expanding into the hinterland from the slave-trading regions of present-day Sierra Leone, Nigeria and Ghana . The Portuguese were in possession of large parts of Angola and Mozambique, in West Africa, in .
 British influence in the region was consolidated after 1807, when the Royal Navy took on the role of enforcing an end to the slave trade and merchants extended the domain of legitimate commerce .
 A major area of British expansion was in southern Africa, where the Cape Colony was w rested from Dutch control in 1806 .
 The frontiers of this settler society expanded throughout the 19th century and a second British colony . It was the first British colony of its kind .
 Dynamic changes occurred, sometimes intensified by European contact, at other times with little reference to encroachment from the outside . African politics has changed dramatically in Africa's history .
 The first European ""explorers"" in Africa were those that ventured into regions in West Africa already well known to Berber traders, but hitherto considered too dangerous for Christians .
 From the mid-19th century onwards Europeans made expeditions into central Africa . Europeans made expeditions into central Africa throughout the mid-20th century .
 The Muslim religion spread south from North Africa (although Coptic Christians held out in Ethiopia) and inland from Arab trading bases in East Africa . The Muslim faith spread from North African to East African .
 This political turbulence was exacerbated by the arrival in the southern African interior from the 1830s onwards of migrant Boer Voortrekkers, attempting to escape control by British .
 They sought to establish independent states, largely in territory depopulated by the mfecane . They came into conflict with the Zulu in Natal, most spectacularly at the Battle of Blood River in 1838 .
 Many moved on again when the British annexed the republic of Natal in 1845 . Many people moved on after the annexation of the republic .
 In West Africa the advance of Islam, associated with the Fulani jihad of 1804, resulted in the disintegration of longest-established kingdoms . The Fulani were resisted in Borno, though the Fulan were resisted by the Borno .
 By the 1860s the Fulani caliphate of Sokoto was pre-eminent in the region, having absorbed much of Hausaland into its aegis . By the 1880s the caliphate of the Sokoto caliphate had been established .
 In Egypt the autocratic modernization strategy adopted by Muhammad Ali in the early decades of the century transformed this province of the Ottoman Empire into an independent state in all but name . Egyptian authority was extended southwards and the Sudan was invaded in 1820-22 in order to secure the upper Nile
 Around Lake Victoria in East Africa, the kingdoms of Buganda, Bunyoro and Karagwe were linked by the trading activities of the Nyamwezi . The Swahiliand Arab dominated coastal region extended outwards from Zanzibar .
 To the north, in Ethiopia, the ancient Christian state centred on Axum was fragmented and in disarray until the mid-19th century . The state of Axum, in the north of Ethiopia, was fragmented to the north .
 Ethiopia has the distinction of being the only African state to have successfully resisted 19th-century European colonial occupation . Thereafter, under the leadership of John IV and Menelik II, the Ethiopian Empire underwent consolidation .
 The creation and expansion of new states and societies in Africa was accompanied by cultural change and accommodation . The creation of new African states, whether originating from within Africa or from external forces, was accompanied with cultural change .
 In North and West Africa, conquest and the spread of Islam were closely associated . conquest and Islam was closely associated, although one did not presuppose the other . Conquest and Islam did not pre-empt the other, but one of the key factors in spreading Islam .
 Christianity had been present in North Africa from the 2nd century . Christianity had become firmly established in Coptic Ethiopia . Islam was checked by the rise of Islam .
 Efforts to convert other parts of Africa to Christianity had been led by the Portuguese from the 15th century . Efforts had been made to convert African Christians to Christianity .
 Some see missionaries as crucial precursors of European colonialism . It was in the 19th century, however, that intense Catholic and Protestant proselytization occurred .
 Christianity did not replace indigenous African religious traditions in any simple manner . Christianity didn't replace indigenous religious traditions with Christianity .
 African forms of Christianity emerged that would later serve as an important ideology in mobilizing resistance to European colonialism . Adaptation and coexistence was more the norm and, in many instances, Christianity emerged in Africa .
 At the start of the 19th century the interior of Africa was barely known to the outside world . The interior of the continent was barely seen to outsiders .
 Expeditions, whether motivated by scientific and geographic curiosity or the search for natural resources and wealth, attracted considerable interest in Europe . The exploits of travellers and explorers were celebrated both in terms of individual achievement and as sources of national pride .
 Among the best-known 19th-century expeditions were those that explored the sources of the Nile, the Congo, the Zambezi and the Niger .
 The exploration and mapping of Africa proved of considerable importance to the drawing of colonial boundaries in the late 19th century . The map of Africa was important to drawing colonial boundaries .
 Afrikaners secured notable victories, but in 1900 their main towns were captured by the British . In the initial phase the Afrikans won notable victories . In 1900 the British captured their main cities in South Africa .
 General Kitchener finally defeated them by burning their farmsteads and imprisoning civilians in concentration camps . Kitchener's victory was the result of burning their farms, imprisoning them in concentration camp camps .
 In 1910, the Union of South Africa gained independence under the leadership of the Afrikaner general Louis Botha .
 Most of the African landmass and its peoples were parcelled out in a mere ten years after 1880 . The speed of the process was bewildering, even more so when one considers that most of the continent was parcelled out .
 European competition for formal possession of Africa was accompanied by intense nationalist flag-waving and expressions of racial arrogance . It contributed to the tensions that resulted in the outbreak of the First World War .
 It was agreed that a nation that was firmly established on a stretch of coast had the right to claim sovereignty over the associated hinterland on which its trade depended for the supply of goods . and as a virtually untapped market for finished goods during Europe’s ‘second�
 Others view the partition of Africa in terms of intra-European nationalist rivalry . The prestige associated with possession of foreign territory and ambitions of individual statesmen and diplomats .
 A variant of this theory emphasizes conditions on the ground, claiming that European powers were sucked further and further into Africa as a result of local colonial crises and trading opportunities . The theory is said to be based on the fact that African nations were sucked into Africa by colonial powers .
 Prospectors of all nationalities flooded into the region, and Britain was concerned about a possible alliance between the Afrikaners and the Germans to the west .
 British reinforcements won several major battles, but the Afrikaners then adopted guerrilla tactics . Kitchener's ruthless approach was eventually overcome by the ruthless approach of General Kitchener . The Afrikans adopted guerrilla warfare tactics which were eventually overcome .
 The partition of Africa cannot be satisfactorily understood without taking into account the dynamics of African societies themselves . The partitioning of Africa can't be satisfied with the understanding of African society's dynamics, writes CNN.com .
 Indigenous leaders sought to enrol Europeans as convenient allies in the struggle to establish supremacy over traditional enemies . In some instances colonial expansion made possible by indigenous leaders .
 Trading and commercial opportunities encouraged certain groups of Africans to cement ties with Europeans . Europeans were encouraged to trade and trade with Africans in the 1930s .
 African leaders proved adept at manipulating relationships with European powers to their own advantage . Land or mineral concessions were made to Europeans in the hope that full-scale occupation could be averted .
 Africans resisted initial European colonial advance, or rose in rebellion soon after . In a number of celebrated instances, Africans resisted the initial European . colonial advance .
 Common informal means of resistance included non-payment of taxes, avoidance of labour demands, migration, or membership of secret religious societies .
 Africans sought some sort of accommodation with Europeans in order to avoid outright confrontation . Usually, Africans sought accommodation with the advancing Europeans in Africa .
 In non-settler societies and beyond major towns and centres, many Africans were able to ignore the European presence and get on with their own lives .
 In southern Africa, the discovery and exploitation of diamonds and gold created huge demands for African labour . The discovery of diamonds, gold and diamonds has created huge demand for African workers .
 Migrant workers came from as far afield as Mozambique, Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland . Migrants came from Mozambiquique, N. Rhodesia, Mozambiques and Northern Rhodesians .
 Demands for agricultural labour threatened the viability of independent African cultivators in the region . Colonial systems relied on indigenous peasant cultivators, who were frequently able to prosper from their participation in export markets .
 Forced labour was widely used by agricultural concession companies in Mozambique and Angola, and by the rubber plantations of the Belgian Congo, for example . Forced labour is widely used in agricultural concessions and plantations of Belgian Congo .
 Railway networks werre built that linked coastal ports to the hinterland and served as a major stimulus to trade and commodity production . Communication infrastructure built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Railways proved particularly important for the development of mining as well as commercial agriculture . Railways were important for mining and commercial agriculture in India .
 They were also vital for the supply of labour and were crucial for the economic development of the region . They were vital for supply of labourers and for the development of labour .
 After the initial phase of railway construction, roadbuilding programmes brought some of the most remote areas into direct contact with colonial economy .
 The arrival of trucks stimulated the re-emergence of the African merchant class, particularly in West Africa .
 Rapid urbanization, a remarkable feature of the colonial era, was stimulated by the development of transport links and of internal and external trade . Rapid urbanisation was a feature of colonial era .
 In much of colonial Africa the spread of education was closely linked to religious change . The spread of religious change in Africa was linked to education .
 The spread of Western education, building on earlier missionary endeavours, tended to be geared to the requirements of colonial regimes providing skilled workers, clerks and petty officials . Western education built up to provide skilled workers and officials .
 Many Africans eagerly embraced education, often as a means of social advancement . Many African nations have embraced education as a way of advancing social status .
 The spread of literacy opened up new horizons and possibilities that could not easily be controlled by the colonial powers . Thus, the spread of illiteracy opened up a new horizon for the world .
 Many of the early African nationalists were the products of mission education men who became politicized when the opportunities opened up by their education were denied them by the inequalities inherent in colonial rule .
 Education and Christianity were not, however, universally welcomed by Africans . Christianity and education was not always welcomed to Africa .
 While social mobility offered social mobility to many, these agencies also threatened the power of traditional elites . While offering social mobility, they also threatened traditional elites' power .
 Forms of Christianity evolved which combined African belief systems with Western ones . Frequently, forms of Christianity were combined with African traditions .
 The Bible also offered fertile ground for reinterpretation of ways that challenged European rule . The Bible was also fertile ground to challenge European rule in Europe .
 Significant and wide-ranging as these changes were, however, innovations were seldom imposed on a blank slate . "Inventive innovations are seldom imposed upon a blank blank slate," the author says .
 colonial institutions were built on existing structures and moulded according to circumstances . Rather than existing structures, colonial institutions are moulded into circumstances, say experts .
 Many African societies showed great resilience and adaptability in surviving it . Far from capitulating to alien rule, many African societies have shown resilience .
 The export of raw materials from Africa affected agriculture and labour markets throughout the continent . The export has affected agriculture, labour markets in Africa .
 Although mining operations and large plantations were controlled by colonists, small-scale peasant production did survive in many places and benefited from export markets .
 Railways were crucial to economic development, especially for the transportation of mineral ores . Railways are important for the transport of minerals, especially in mineral mining .
 Hie strengthening of (oloninl rale was linked la o number of ttowmit end palilkol Iae1w$ r incluefing ihe need for tow mater iok lo supply rapidly Indus hialiung economies □nd die desire l
 The late 19th century witnessed dramatic changes in the relationship between manufacturing countries and those regions of the world from which raw materials were obtained . The relationship between the manufacturing and raw materials was also changing .
 The volume of international trade more than trebled between 1870 and 1914 . Large-scale industrialization in Europe and the U.S. and the spread of colonial rule, particularly in Asia and Africa, was the main factor .
 London remained the world's leading financial centre through its operation of the international gold standard . The gold standard defined the value of the major currencies and so facilitated trade . London is now the most important financial centre in the world, according to experts .
 The enormous expansion of international trade was greatly helped by technological developments, especially in transport and communications . Transport and communications are the key to international trade .
 Sailing ships gave way to larger and faster steam vessels, which required coaling stations strategically placed around the globe . Railways also helped to increase trading activities in North America and Asiatic Russia .
 30 million Europeans emigrated to North America during the 19th and early 20th centuries . 30 million people emigrated from Europe to the U.S.
 The creation of wealth in the industrialized eountries led to growing interest in investing some of that wealth . In the developing countries, investors want to invest in developing countries .
 By financing railway building or mining development in these areas, industrial economies helped increase imports of food and raw materials . Industrial economies helped to create larger export markets for their manufactured goods .
 World economy was becoming more integrated in late 19th century . Different regions increasingly dependent on one another . Factors influencing imperial expansion were factors in imperial expansion .
 Competition between states intensified, spilling over into the political sphere . Inevitably, competition between states began to become political .
 Britain's early lead as the first industrial power was linked to expansion of the British Empire from the late 18th century onwards, above all in India .
 Other countries tried to emulate Britain by building up empires of their own . The Empire of the Middle Ages ruled out of competition with the British Empire .
 As business conditions worsened in the 1870s and 1880s, a growing number of countries sought to protect their home markets, imposing tariffs to limit the influx of foreign goods .
 The attraction of untapped markets in Africa and Asia intensified as a result of the success of the company . The attraction has intensified as the company looks to tap into untapped African markets .
 Political factors in Europe also contributed to the growth of imperialism . The rise of imperialism in the Middle Ages was also a factor in the rise in imperialism .
 The newly formed countries of Germany and Italy, as well as the declining state of Portugal, saw the acquisition of colonies as a way of asserting their status as world powers .
 Overseas expansion also helped to div ert attention from the domestic social problems created by industrialization and population growth . Overseas . expansion helped to . div . attention from domestic social issues created by . industrialization .
 Christian missionaries were effective in lobbying governments to defend their activities overseas . Further motivation was provided by Christian missionaries, who lobbied governments .
 Political and economic changes taking place within non-European societies created important opportunities for the European powers to increase their influence . The European powers were able to gain influence in non-EU societies .
 Local "elites" groups who became wealthy through trade and collaboration with European powers often facilitated the colonization of an area . Local ‘elites’ groups often helped to become rich through trade, collaboration .
 Territory was sometimes acquired in order to protect existing colonial interests from rivals . Territory was acquired for strategic, rather than economic, reasons, such as to protect colonial interests . Territory acquired in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Colonizing powers found that in order to support a limited initial claim it became necessary to expand inland from coastal bases and establish further trade links .
 No single factor can explain the growth of imperialism in this period . The results were nevertheless far-reaching, as evidenced by the “scramble” for overseas territories in the 1880s .
 By 1914 nearly all of Africa had been divided up between the European powers . Britain, France and Germany had also extended their control of Southeast Asia and the Pacific .
 China escaped formal partition only because the Western powers could not devise a means of dividing it that was acceptable to all of them . China is highly prized by Western powers because of the enormous potential market it represented .
 The European powers were not alone in their enthusiasm for overseas expansion . The European nations were also keen to expand overseas .
 After defeating Spain in the war of 1898, the U.S. inherited many of the former Spanish colonies, including the Philippines and Puerto Rico . The Philippines was one of the last Spanish colonies to fall to the United States .
 Japan, too, lacking economic resources to fuel its rapid modernization, increasingly looked to China and Korea . Japan's lack of economic resources has led to the rapid modernization of the country .
 It was the Europeans, however, who gained most from this phase of imperialism . It was also the Europeans who gained the most from the period .
 By 1914 the British Empire covered a fifth of the world and included a quarter of world’s population . The second-largest empire, that of France, had expanded by over 10 million square kilometres since 1870 .
 This phase of activity generated great tension among the colonial powers, aggravating their already existing mutual suspicions and feelings of insecurity, it was accomplished without direct conflict between them .
 The consequences of colonial rule had far-reaching consequences for the new colonies . Imperial control of the colonies was far more important than the British Empire .
 Their economies became more dependent on, and more vulnerable to, fluctuations in international trade . Their economies are becoming more dependent upon international trade fluctuations .
 Transport and other infrastructures were developed to meet the needs of colonial needs, rather than local needs . Transport and infrastructure was developed in colonial times, not local, needs .
 Artificial colonial boundaries frequently included different ethnic or linguistic groups, sowing the seeds of future divisions . Artificial colonial borders often included different groups of people or groups . The boundaries were often created in colonial Britain .
 Western education, medicine and religion eventually led to a devaluing of indigenous cultures . Initially, the social and cultural impact of colonial rule was limited . Western education led to the devaluation of indigenous culture .
 colonial powers lacked the resources to employ force on a routine basis . They maintained their dominance of a region by repeated assertions of their superiority .
 Its aim was to ensure a continuing supply of raw materials and to stimulate new markets for finished products . Its aim is to ensure that the UK will continue to supply raw materials .
 The U.S. made a comparatively small investment given the size of its manufacturing output . The United States, which was less reliant on overseas trade, made the investment .
 The United States was by this time the world's world's leading manufacturer . With its rich supplies of raw materials and enormous internal market it had less need for external trade .
 Europe's population trebled, with Britain experiencing a near fourfold increase . Britain's population increased by nearly fourfold in the last century .
 The United States saw the most spectacular growth, caused by settlers flooding into the country . The number of Native Americans, already decimated by war and foreign diseases, continued to decline .
 High population growth around the world was matched by the development of large conurbations . High conurbation is a result of high population growth in large areas of the world .
 In 1800 there were some 40 cities in the world with a population of between 100,000 and 500,000 . Of which nearly half were in Asia, nearly half of the population was in Asia .
 By 1900 many of these had more than doubled in size and new cities had sprung up in the U.S. New cities were built in the United States .
 There were now about 80 cities with a population of between 250,000 and 500,000 in Asia . Just over a fifth of these were to be found in Asia, but only a fifth in the world .
 In some regions it was caused by a a higher birth rate, in others by a decline in the death rate, but in most cases it was due to a combination of the two . The death rate has also declined in some regions .
 The birth and death rates in each country were affected by a range of socio-economic factors . Factors contributing to population increase include factors such as economic factors and birth rates . Factors contribute to population growth in some countries .
 The increasing supply of food reduced the number of people dying from malnutrition, and improved people’s overall health, causing them to live longer . One of the main reasons for the increase in food supply is to reduce malnutrition .
 The Agricultural Revolution in 18th-century Europe had led to the use of more efficient farming techniques, which in turn had increased food production . Agricultural Revolution led to more efficient techniques, leading to the rise in production of food .
 The expansion of the international economy and improvements in transport also contributed to improved food supplies . Cheap food can be transported from North America and elsewhere to Europe .
 Industrialization was another major factor in the population growth of the 19th century . Industrialization also contributed to the growth of population growth .
 In most industrial countries the living standards of the working classes rose from the mid-19th century onwards as new employment opportunities became available . Although initially it created a new urban poverty, initially it was initially created by the urban poor .
 Medical advances made childbirth less dangerous, and the use of vaccination helped prevent epidemics . Vaccination helped prevent major epidemics in the United States .
 In western Europe the use of birth control led to a drop in the birth rate from the 1880s onwards . At the same time birth rates in Asia began to rise, birth rates began to increase .
 It is usual to distinguish between ‘voluntary’ migrants including those seeking improved economic prospects . For many individuals the motives for emigrating were mixed, including those in the slave trade .
 Before the 1890s most of these migrants came from northern and western Europe, but subsequently the majority came from central and southern Europe . Most of the migrants were from northern Europe .
 Europeans were particularly mobile during this period, settling not only in the United States but also in Latin America, Canada, Australasia, South Africa and Siberia . Europeans settled in the U.S. as well as Canada and South Africa .
 Migration facilitated by the revolution in transport, which substantially reduced the cost of transatlantic travel, and by the investment of European capital overseas, which created opportunities for railway building and economic development .
 Chinese migrants settled in Southeast Asia, Australia and the U.S. to work in mines and plantations . Chinese migrants worked in mines, plantations or to build railways . Migrants settled in Australia, Southeast Asia and the United States .
 Pressure on resources in Japan also led many of its citizens to emigrate to Manchuria and the Americas . Many of Japan's citizens emigrated to the Americas in the 1930s and 1940s .
 The overcrowded housing that resulted often led to squalor and disease . Overcrowded housing often left people living in squalid conditions . Inmates were often forced to live in overcrowded conditions .
 This was due both to population growth and, especially in Europe and the United States, to the development of new industries in the towns . This is due to the growth of the towns in the UK and Europe .
 At the same time, technological change in agriculture, particularly in Europe, led to a contraction in the demand for labour .
 By 1900 around 80 per cent of Britain’s population lived in towns of over 10,000 people . London had increased to over 5 million, and London had a population of over 5million .
 By 1900 many large cities had developed around the world, the majority of people still lived in rural areas . However, despite the fact that by 1900, many of the world's most rural areas were still rural areas.
 Urban infrastructures often unable to meet the new demands being made on them, leading to inadequate housing stock, water supplies and sewage disposal . Housing stock and water supplies are often inadequate, resulting in problems .
 Such conditions were a factor in the cholera epidemics that affected many European and North American cities from the 1840s to the 1860s . Cholera epidemic was a major factor in epidemics in Europe and America .
 Last major European outbreak of cholera was in Hamburg in 1892 . As a result, measures to improve public health were introduced in 1850s .
 Improvements in transport, especially in the railway system, encouraged the building of suburbs, which greatly eased the problem of urban overcrowding . Suburburbies were built in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Around 30 million people left Europe between 1815 and 1914 bound for the United States . Rising unemployment at home in times of economic depression and the potato famine of the mid-1840s led to emigrants .
 Sometimes migrants left Europe in order to avoid persecution of various forms, as was the case with the Russian Jews . From the 1880s, Russian Jews were the target of officially encouraged pogroms . Sometimes migrants also left Europe to escape persecution .
 Later European settlers headed for South Africa and beyond, to Australia and New Zealand . Later settlers headed to South Africa, then to New Zealand and Australia .
 Millions of Chinese and Japanese migrated to the west coast of North America in search of work . Elsewhere in the world millions of people migrated to Southeast Asia and North America . The majority of the migrants were from China .
 People lived longer, were healthier and more literate, enjoyed greater participation in politics . Yet it was also a time when people had far easier access to information, transport and communication networks than ever before .
 The Second World War ok) storied os a European conflict, but spread to the Parifir when Japan seized territory . The Parifiri was the first time Japan took control of the region .
 In interior period disputes broke oul over territory in South America and East Asia . But elsewhere the reluctance of the colonial powers la become embroiled in territorial disputes maintained on uneasy peace .
 The world in 1900 was dominated by the nation-states of Europe, of which the most powerful were Britain, France, Russia, Austria-Hungary and Germany . The United States chose to remain outside of the struggle for supremacy between the European nations .
 The colonial empires which underpinned it disintegrated and the United States became the leading world power in the second half of the century . The U.S. became the world's leading superpower after the collapse of colonial empires .
 The first half of the century was dominated by the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the two world wars . The Russian Revolution was the most significant event in history .
 Of the total number of casualties in the Second World War it is estimated that half were civilians . Half of the casualties in WWII were civilians, according to the statistics .
 The scale of the killing was largely due to the increasingly lethal power of weaponry . It was due to an increase in the number of people killed in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 Major powers sought to prevent local conflicts from escalating into major international wars . This reached so terrifying a peak with the invention and use of the atomic bomb at the end of the Second World War .
 After 1945 there was no reduction in bitter international conflict, hut it took a new form . After 1945, the Cold War took a different form . The Cold War was the first of its kind .
 The war in Europe was fought by an alliance of the communist Soviet Union with the capitalist states of Europe and the U.S. against the fascist regimes in Germany and Ttalv .
 Following the defeat of fascism, the United States and Soviet Union emerged as bitterly opposed superpowers with the resources to develop huge arsenals of nuclear weapons . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were bitter rivals for nuclear supremacy .
 From 1947 a “Cold War’ developed between the two superpowers and their allies . They gave support to opposing sides in conflicts in, for example, Korea, Vietnam, Angola and the Middle East .
 The collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union in 1989-91 brought the Cold War to an end . The collapse was the collapse of the Soviet-Eastern bloc in the early 1990s .
 While there was no global war in the second half of the century, there were many local wars . Local wars were waged with increasing technological expertise and precision .
 Some were w ars of independence from colonial powers, most of which had given up their empires by 1970 . Most of the world's most powerful powers had already given up .
 Other conflicts, such as the Korean War and Vietnam War, were struggles for national control between communists and non-communists . Each side was backed by one of the superpowers .
 The United Nations was established in 1945 with the aim of stabilizing international relations . It failed to bring about world peace, but helped to avert or negotiate the end of some conflicts .
 Some of the most persistent campaigns of violence during the 20th century were conducted by powerful governments against people of the same nation but of another political persuasion, social class or religious belief .
 In the Soviet Union under Stalin under Stalin tens of millions of people were sent to their deaths in forced-labour camps .
 In Argentina and Chile thousands of political opponents of the government simply “disappeared” in the 1970s . In Cambodia in 1975-79, Pol Pot's brutal experiment in social restructuring resulted in the death of over one million people . In Argentina, Chile and Cambodia thousands of
 The Ottoman Turks deported an estimated 1,75 million Armenians from eastern Anatolia during the First World War . The deportations of Armenians are estimated to have taken place in eastern Anatolia .
 In Europe under the Nazis, between the mid-1930s and 1945, six million Jews, along with other minority groups, died in concentration and death camps . Six million Jews were killed in concentration camps between the 1930s and 1940s .
 Thousands of East Berliners flooded through the border to ibe West on the night of 9 November 1989 . I Hem Inking the opportunity of demonstrating their contempt for the East German authorities by dimbing on, and hi caking down, the Berlin Wall .
 One result was an increase in localized wars, largely arising from boundary disputes . Civil wars caused by conflicts between different ethnic groups oc between those with conflicting religious or political beliefs .
 Democracy reached South Africa in April 1994, when the black population was allowed to vote in state elections for the first time . Democracy was reached in South Africa's first state elections in 1994 .
 During the 20th century enormous improvements in social and economic conditions took place . However, the improvements were not evenly distributed around the world .
 Those countries in Europe, North America and Asia that had gone through a process of industrialization in the previous century reaped the benefits, especially in the stable economic environment of the years between 1945 and the early 1970s .
 In other countries, most notably those in Southeast Asia, rapid industrialization took place from the 1970s . Rapid industrialization began in the 1960s .
 Advances in medical technology transformed the lives of people in Europe, North America and Japan, but were by no means widely available outside the most affluent nations .
 The dramatic decline in infant mortality rates and increased life expectancy in many countries during the second half of the 20th century can largely be ascribed to improved living standards . Better medical care was just one part of the improvement in living standards, of course .
 The world’s population doubled between 1940 and 2000 . 90 per cent of the total growth in the 1990s took place in non-industrialized regions of the world .
 Population increases were often accompanied by rapid urbanization, often unplanned and unsupported by improvements in the urban infrastructure . Population increases are often followed by urbanization unplanned and unsupported by improvements in infrastructure .
 Such rapid demographic change caused increasing social pressures, which could lead to social instability and conflict . Such rapid social pressures could lead social instability, conflict, according to experts .
 Supply of food and water became an overtly political issue during the later 20th century . The supply of water and food and electricity became a political issue in the 1930s .
 Political and environmental factors resulted in periods of famine in some regions of the world, notably sub-Saharan Africa . In Western Europe and North America, agricultural technology and subsidies led to gluts of certain foods, which were then stored to prevent falling prices .
 By the end of the century the increasing demand for water was threatening to lead to conflicts as, for example, the damming or diversion of a river by one country caused shortages in others .
 The First World War profoundly changed European politics and society . It destabilized the Europeandominated world economic system . The World War destabilized Europe's economic system.
 This led to reduced levels of trade and high unemployment problems which reached crisis point in the Great Depression of 1929-33 and were still there at the outset of the Second World War in 1939 . In the 1930s, unemployment levels were still at the highest level in the world .
 Following the war, international agreements and institutions were established to prevent further crises and stabilize and expand world trade . After the war the world was able to stabilise and expand trade .
 Both rich and poor countries suffered the consequences as unemployment rose to levels comparable with those of the inter-war years . Unemployment in the UK was the highest level of unemployment in the country's history .
 During the 20th century a growing number of women became actively involved in politics . Many developing countries were encouraged to take out huge loans, the Y . The Y was the first time women were allowed to enter politics .
 The number of women holding government posts remains low . Their role was largely confined to the grassroots level of the government .
 The defining feature of the closing decades of the 20th century and the start of the 21st century was considered by some to I'jc “globalization”, with multinational corporations moving their operations around the world in accordance with their needs . Individuals travelling and communicating with one another
 nationalism expressed both by nations attempting to avoid domination by superpowers and by groups within nation-states who felt oppressed on economic, religious or ethnic grounds .
 The attacks on the United States on September 11, 2001, were a dramatic indication of the threat posed to the global community by international terrorist groups . The attacks were an indication of a dramatic threat posed by international terrorism groups .
 A Since ihe Second World Wor (here bos been o worldwide trend towards ihe creation of Iroding blocs between neighbouring sloies and erstwhile enemies) Since the Second World War, there has been a worldwide trend to ihe create a worldwide .
 A fter the defeat of Napoleon in 1815 Europe underwent a period of domestic transformation and upheaval that permanently altered its make-up . The photo shows the financial district of San Francis .
 New nation states such as Italy were created, while the Ottomans and Austria-Hungary began to weaken . New nations were created after the collapse of the Ottoman Empire .
 For much of the 19th century a balance of power existed in which no single European nation was strong enough to dominate or attempt to dominate the whole continent . No single nation was powerful enough to . dominate, or attempt . to dominate, the European continent .
 Britain, Prussia, Russia, Austria and France were growing at different rates . The rise of Germany was the result of the Napoleonic Wars . Germany became one of Europe's most powerful nations .
 The rise of Germany effectively altered the continent's continent-wide balance of power . Germany's rise of power has changed Europe's power balance .
 The Industrial Revolution had changed the basis of national strength, making a country’s production of coal, iron and steel, and the sophistication of its weaponry, even more important than the size of its population .
 Between 1871 and 1913 Germany moved from being the second strongest to being the leading industrial power in Europe . The newly unified Germany mode alliances with Austria-Hungary formed a huge power bloc in central Europe .
 These alliances also included Germany's arch-rival Russia {1881 - 1881 - and Italy (18821) These alliances included Russia and Italy .
 In 1881 the German Chancellor, Count Otto von Bismarck, had concluded an alliance with Russia and Austria-Hungary, known as the “Three Emperors’ Alliance” The alliance was intended to keep France isolated .
 After Bismarck’s fall in 1890, German foreign policy became increasingly concerned with the desire for expansion, both in Europe and further afield, in Africa and Southeast Asia .
 France had been fearful and resentful of German strength since the loss of Alsace and Lorraine in 1871 . France broke out of its isolation in 1894 by making an alliance with Russia .
 The Franco-Russian alliance was a first step towards the creation of an anti-German coalition . But if Germany’s growing power was to be effectively opposed, Britain had to be included .
 Britain saw little profit in actively intervening on the Continent . With a massive and growing global empire and the world’s first industrialized economy, Britain did not intervene in Europe .
 At the end of the century, however, its isolation seemed considerably less palatable as its economic dominance disappeared with the industrialization of other European countries and the United States .
 Much of Europe (and a sizeable proportion of the British people) resented its imperial domination . Meanwhile, the criticisms levelled at its role in the South African War showed that much of Europe .
 It was by no means certain that Britain would side with the Franco-Russian alliance . The Triple Entente was formed in the 1930s .
 France and Russia had been considered Britain’s greatest enemies during most of the 19th century . In 1901 the British and German governments discussed signing an alliance of their own .
 Britain signed an entente with France in 1904 and with Russia in 1907 . However, as German power continued to grow, Britain signed a pact with France and Russia .
 Britain’s resolve was hardened by the growth of the German navy . The Germans had, since 1898, been building up their naval strength . By 1909 it seemed possible that they could achieve naval supremacy .
 British government reacted by dramatically increasing production of British battleships . British naval supremacy had always been one of the cardinal elements of British policy .
 The subsequent naval construction race, won by the British, increased the rivalry between the countries . It made it more likely that Britain would intervene if Germany went to war with France and Russia .
 During the second half of the 19th century Serbia, Bulgaria, Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania all agitated for independence . During the same period Serbia and Bulgaria agitated for independentism .
 Austria annexed Bosnia into its empire in 1908 . Austria-Hungary and Russia both coveted these areas, and Austria annexed them .
 Bosnia was a multiethnic area populated by Croats, Serbs and Muslims of Turkish and Slavic descent . Bosnia was also a multi-ethnic region populated by Croatians and Serbs . The region was populated by Muslims and Croats .
 Serbian nationalists opposed Austrian rule in Bosnia, seeking to include the region in a larger Serbian national state . Serbian nationalists wanted to include region in larger Serbian state .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne, was assassinated in Sarajevo in June 1914 . He and his wife were assassinated by a Serbian nationalist . The couple were killed by a Serb nationalist .
 Austria's response was to set about crushing Serbian nationalism permanently . Austria’s response to the Serbian nationalism was to crush it permanently . The Austranian state of Serbia is now ruled out of existence .
 The Russians opposed Austrian attempts to dominate Serbia . Germany promised to support any move the Austrians made .
 When the Russians mobilized their entire armed forces, the Germans and then the French called up their armies . The Russians duly mobilized their whole armed forces . The Germans and the French mobilized their armies.
 As military goals became central to each nation’s policies, the outbreak of the First World War became inevitable . The outbreak of WWI became inevitable as the war became more likely .
 Montenegro, Greece, Serbia and Bulgaria declared war on the Ottoman Empire in 1912 . In October 1912 Montenegro and Greece declared war against the Empire .
 Ottomans relinquished almost all their lands in southeast Europe in 1913, to the advantage of the victorious states . As a result of the treaty, the Ottoms relinquished most of their lands to the victors .
 Second war erupted between Bulgaria and Serbia over territory in Macedonia . Serbia won the war, supported by Montenegro, Romania and the Ottoman Empire . Second war then erupted between Serbia and Bulgaria .
 The two Balkan Wars inflamed existing tensions between Serbia and Austria-Hungary and contributed to the outbreak of the First World War . The two wars created a militarily strong and ambitious Serbia, resulting in tensions between the two countries .
 Coal, vital to the process of industrialization, was also mined in increasing quantities . Coal was mined in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Heavy industry was a necessary precondition for the manufacture of modern weapons, notably battleships . This development of heavy industry was necessary for the production of modern battleships, notably . Heavy industry is necessary to produce modern weapons such as battle ships .
 Modem artillery and rtwthine-guns mode these trenches easy la defend and difficult to attack . The trenches are also easy to defend and easy to attack.
 On the first day of the Battle of the Somme, I inly 1916, when the Btiibh attempted to break ihrough German lines, 20,000 British troops lost ■heir lives, with 1,000 killed .
 On the Eastern Front the Russians, after some initial success, were (arced back by an army equipped with modern weaponry for which they were no match . On the . Eastern Front, the Russians were . (arceed back by . a army equipped . with modern . weaponry for
 Ihe llalrarrrarrs became bogged down in a small area of northeast Italy, but were finally driven bock following the Battle af (aparellu in October 1917 . The battle took place in northeast Italy .
 Troops of the Ottoman Empire became involved in fierce fighting with those of the British Empire in the Tigris Valley . The British Empire was defeated in the battle of the same period .
 1 August 1914 the German army crossed the Belgian border and the First World War began .
 The Triple Entente (Britain, France and Russia) Implemented plans drawn up in preparation for any German aggression . Plans were drawn up by the British and French armies .
 The Germans had devised their famous ""Schlieffen Plan 1 ', according to which they would move through Belgium into France* sweeping around Paris and encircling the French army before the slower-moving Russians could muster their forces .
 If executed properly the Schlieffen Plan might have resulted in a German victory in 1914 . However, although the German army made quick progress through Belgium, their Chief of General Staff, von Mohke, became increasingly concerned about Russian strength .
 This “miracle” of the Marne was the first crucial turning point of the war . This ‘miracle of the . Marne’ was the . first crucial turn point of . the war. This is the first . “Miracle’ of
 The Schlieffen Plan was a political, as well as military, failure for the Germans . It was a failed political and military plan for the country .
 By invading Belgium, the Germans had ignored long-standing treaties guaranteeing that country’s neutrality, and convinced the British of the need to enter the war . Germany thus found itself hemmed in on two sides by the Entente Powers, with only the support of Austria-Hungary
 British and French built long lines of trenches stretching from the Swiss border, through northern France to the English Channel . The Western Front Stalemate quickly ensued on the Western Front, as the Germans*
 Long-range artillery pieces, accurate rifles and machine-guns gave the defenders a crucial advantage over the attacking forces . Machine-guns and accurate rifles were crucial to the defenders' success .
 Industrialization and a we 11-developed railway system also meant that more ammunition and other vital supplies were available than ever before . Large armies could be transported from area to area as the situation dictated .
 The following year the French offensives against the retrenched German position on the Siegfried/1 linden burg line caused such heavy French casualties that there was mutiny among French troops . The French forces suffered heavy casualties during the attacks .
 Bottle wn by Enneale Powers K imkfw turtle 4Novel angogetneiit | AM convoy routes Ndvd Wockode iiF Cemnd Powers. Furthest entrance by Central Povrau on dote prised & Barrie
 The picture on other fronts was more fluid, but just as bloody . H Fighting around the world is more fluid than in the Middle East .
 On the Eastern Front a large Russian army was heavily defeated at the Battle of Tannenberg in August 1914 . The Russians saw limited success in 1915, but ultimately their large, but poorly organized, forces were pushed back . The Russian army saw limited successes in 1915 .
 The Germans made deep advances into European Russia in 1916, and by 1917 the morale of the Russian army and of its people was beginning to crack . By 1917, Russia was starting to crack.
 In the Middle East fighting also moved back and forth over a considerable area . The Middle East has seen a resurgence of fighting in recent years .
 Entente Powers fared badly with British, Australian, New Zealand and French soldiers being pinned down and forced to withdraw from the Gallipoli Peninsula during 1915 and early 1916 . British Empire force from India surrendered to the Ottomans at A1 Kut in April 1916 .
 An Arab uprising against Ottoman rule in the summer of 1916 pushed the Ottomans out of much of the Arabian Peninsula . The British captured Jerusalem in December 1917 .
 Despite these victories, the Middle East had no decisive influence on the outcome of the First World War . The outcome could really only be decided on the battlefields of Europe, which was decided on battlefields .
 In Africa fighting broke out in all German colonies, but was most protracted in German East Africa . In 1916, British, South African and Portuguese forces combined under General Smuts to counter the German forces .
 In 1915 the Italian government joined the Entente Powers, following promises of Austrian territory . The Italian government was a signatory of the Triple Alliance . In 1915, Italian government signed an agreement to join the alliance with Austria .
 Austrian-German force inflicted defeat on the Italian army at the Battle of Gaporetto in October 1917 . In the next two years hundreds of thousands of Italians were slaughtered before the defeat in 1917 .
 By 1917 the fortunes of the Entente Powers within Europe were at a low ebb, and a German victory seemed a distinct possibility . The entry of the United States was a major factor in the development of the U.S.
 A disastrous German foreign and strategic policy was, however, to throw away their chance of victory . A disastrous foreign policy was the result of a disastrous German policy, however .
 It had been assumed by both sides before the war began that large fleets of battleships would engage in a decisive battle .
 Germans inflicted the greatest damage but were forced back to port . It was a rather confused affair, with the Germans inflicting the most damage but being forced back port .
 Germans turned early in the war to submarine warfare as a means of cutting off vital imports to Britain .
 By sinking merchant ships without warning, the Germans inflamed U.S. opinion . The Germans sank merchant ships in World War II without warning .
 Germans renewed unrestricted submarine warfare around the British Isles in February 1917 . At first, after the sinking of the liner SS Lusitania in 1915, the Germans backed off . In February 1917, in a dangerous gamble, they renewed their unrestricted warfare .
 They were hoping to knock Britain out of the war before the United States could intervene a rash gamble that failed when the U.S. declared war on Germany on 6 April 1917 .
 Following the signing of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Russians on 3 March 1918, the Germans were able to concentrate their resources on the Western Front . The final push was the final push in the final months of the war .
 Between March and July 1918 the German army hurled itself against the French and British lines . The German army made significant breakthroughs and advanced further than at any time since 1914 .
 As United States troops and supplies flooded into Europe, the German advance petered out, and the German army began to crumple in the face of a counteroffensive .
 Unable to increase their supply of men and weapons, the Germans realized they had lost the war . The Germans realized that they had won the war. The Germans were unable to increase the supply of troops and weapons .
 They approached the Entente Powers for peace terms and at 11.00 am on 11 November 1918 the fighting ceased . The fighting stopped at 11:00am on November 11 1918 .
 The original German ""Schlieffen Plan"" to encircle Paris from the northwest would almost certainly have resulted in a rapid victory . The original plan would have seen the city of Paris encircled from northwest to the north .
 The two sides dug themselves in for a war of attrition that was to last four years . Instead, the German army was forced to retreat following the successful Marne offensive by the French . The French and German armies fought for four years before the end of the war .
 In March 1917, anticipating the Nivelle offensive by the Entente Powers, the Germans withdrew to the Siegfried/Hindenburg Line . The Germans withdrew from the line in March 1917 . The Siegfried line is now known as the "Siegfried Line"
 A German offensive in 1918 was initially successful, but their much smaller army was overstretched . The Entente Powers were now reinforced by United States troops .
 The Germans were driven back until, in November 1918, they were forced to request a truce . The German army was driven back but was forced to ask for a truce after the war .
 The two sides were unevenly matched in terms of the number of men they mobilized . Tensions were high at the start of the campaign .
 Entente Powers suffered a casualty rate of 52 per cent against that of 67 per cent for the Central Powers . Central Powers suffered an average of 52% of their casualties, compared to 52% for Entente .
 As a result of the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 the Austro-Hungarian Empire was dismantled . As a consequence of the Treaty of Peace, the Austo-Hungarians were dismantled .
 Most of it was formed into small nation-states, including the new state of Czechoslovakia . Most of the world's largest nations were formed from small nations . The Czech Republic was one of Europe's most successful nations .
 Several ethnically distinct regions were amalgamated with previously independent states to form Yugoslavia, under the domination of Serbia . In the south, however, several ethnically separate regions were merged into Yugoslavia . Yugoslavia was Yugoslavia's first country to become Yugoslavia, with Serbia dominating it .
 Germany lost territory in the east to the recreated Poland, while a demilitarized area was established along Germany's border with France . Germany's territory was lost to Poland .
 The newly formed Union of Soviet Socialist Republics was threatened by antirevolutionary forces . It was in no postition to resist moves to carve up territory on its western borders .
 First World War changed the map of Europe and the Middle East for ever . World War One changed Europe and Middle East .
 Centuries-old empires were destroyed and new national states were created . Centuries old empires destroyed and national states created . New national states have been created .
 The most important event in establishing the new Europe was the Paris Peace Conference (January-June 1919), which resulted in the Treaty of Versailles . The Paris conference was the first peace conference since the Second World War .
 The conference was called by the victorious Entente Powers after Germany had asked for an armistice in November 1918 . The conference took place in the aftermath of the war's end .
 French called for the division and disarmament of Germany and for huge reparations that the German economy would have been crippled for decades . In a desire to destroy German power, the French wanted to destroy power, he said .
 The Americans sought to establish a stable Europe and a new League of Nations to guarantee global security . The Americans, on the other hand, wanted to establish Europe and the new League Of Nations .
 They believed that the peace should be based on President Wilson’s famous ‘Fourteen Points’ and should be as magnanimous as possible . The peace was based on the famous "Fourteen points”
 The Treaty of Versailles was signed in June 1919 . It was a compromise between the two sides of the world .
 The treaty also stripped Germany of its imperial possessions in Africa and the Pacific, but since this empire had added little to German national strength, its loss did little to weaken it .
 Germany fared much better than its closest ally, Austria-Hungary . Germany suffered much more than its loss than its close ally, the Austrians-Hungarians .
 Part 5 was broken up by the Treaty of Saint-Germain into a host of smaller national states : Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Yugoslavia, Austria and Hungary . Part 5 is broken up into a group of smaller states .
 Italy had entered the war in 1915 because of the promise of booty from Austria-Hungary . Italy was rewarded with a sizeable chunk of new territory . Italy entered the conflict in 1915 but entered again in 1918 because of a promise from the war .
 The greatest territorial losses of any country in Europe were those suffered by Russia . Russia had, under the tsar, been allied to France and Britain, but lost the war against Germany .
 The greatest loss of Russian territory was to the newly created Poland . Poland gained further territory as a result of a brief war with Russia in 1921 .
 As a result of the Paris Peace Conference, nine new states were constructed from various parts of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Russia . The Paris peace conference was held in 1919 .
 Whether or not this was a good thing for the European balance of power remained to be seen . The EU has not yet decided whether or not it is good for the continent .
 Both Germany and the Soviet Union were eager to regain much of the territory they had given up against their will . Germany and Soviet Union wanted to regain some of the land they had lost in the war .
 In southeast Europe, a variety of different nationalities that had been held in check by Austria-Hungary were exposed to a whole new set of tensions . The tensions in southeast Europe were now exposed to new tensions between Austria and Hungary .
 Versailles treaty also called for the establishment of a League of Nations . President Wilson of the U.S. championed the idea of the idea .
 The United States refused to ratify the Treaty . After a bitter debate in the Senate, the U.S. decided to stay out of the League .
 Despite its losses Germany retained the potential to dominate Europe demonstrated by the recovery in its industrial output during the 1920s . The British and the French had been unable to master German might without American aid .
 The First World War finally broke up the Ottoman Empire but still left much of the Middle East in limbo . The Ottoman Empire was still ruled by the British Empire until 1918 .
 Most of the region was assigned to British or French control alliances with some of the newly created protection to the boundaries of its eastern European states .
 The most signatories, and a united foreign policy, under League of Nations mandates . The most signed signatories to the most . under . League of . Nations mandates. under .
 Even areas that gained nominal independence Egypt and the new Arab kingdoms were heavily reliant on Britain for defence and development .
 The one state that grew in strength during the immediate post-war period was, surprisingly, Turkey . Turkey was one of the few states to grow in strength in the immediate period .
 Versailles treaty has been seen as one of the fundamental causes of the Second World War . The long-term outcomes of the peace have been criticized . The treaty was signed in 1918, and the war was declared in 1918 .
 In 1923, the French moved their army into the Rhineland in response to Germany’s inability to pay war reparations . The French army moved into the region in 1923 after Germany refused to pay reparations for their war reparation .
 By 1924 Germany was gripped in a cycle of hyperinflation that saw some people taking home their pay packets in wheelbarrows . The German mark collapsed in value and by 1924 some people had to take home their earnings in wheelchairs .
 By the late 1920s, Europe seemed to be on the way to establishing a new equilibrium . The economies of all the major European countries had recovered and were experiencing strong growth .
 For a while the strategy seemed quite successful, as eastern Europe developed a new stability . The strategy was quite successful for a while, but now it has come to an end . The situation in eastern Europe has been described as 'strategic stability'
 Czechoslovakia evolved into a democracy, Poland became a nation-state capable of defeating the Soviet Union and establishing friendly relations with its neighbours . Yugoslavia seemed able to accommodate a multi-ethnic population while Yugoslavia seemed to accommodate its multi-national population .
 Perhaps if the prosperity of the 1920s had continued for longer, eastern Europe might have survived German and Russian attempts to take back their lost lands .
 Great Depression that started in 1929 brought to an end Europe’s brief period of co-operation and recovery . The Great Depression affected every country in Europe to some extent .
 This financial crisis served as the catalyst for the rise to power of the German Nazi party . It swept aside the settlement laid out in the Versailles treaty and ended attempts to find peaceful solutions to Europe's problems .
 Kuwait, nominally independent, remained strongly influenced by Britain, as was Egypt . Egypt, Kuwait, Kuwait and Egypt were all influenced by British influence .
 Large areas of Turkey were placed under European control, until Turkish resistance forced the withdrawal of all foreigners and led to the founding of the Republic of Turkey in 1923 . The Republic was formed in 1923, when Turkey became the first republic of Turkey .
 President Woodrow Wilson of the United States arrived at the Paris Peace Conference . Wilson advocated a liberal approach to world affairs, including an end to colonial rule and the setting up of a League of Nations .
 The League of Nations was included in the Treaty of Versailles . Other victorious powers forced him to compromise on some of his aims .
 The United States Senate rejected American involvement in such an organization and refused to ratify the treaty . Wilson's disappointment, however, was disappointed by the U.S. Senate's rejection .
 Lenin made it dear that he did not regard Stalin as a suitable successor . Information that Stalin ignored and repressed in his drive to become leader of the Soviet Union was ignored .
 Admiral Kolchak formed an Eastern Front in Siberia and in 1919 advanced beyond the Volga . In 1919, he formed a Soviet Union force in Siberia . In 1921, he joined Russia's Second World War .
 In the south, resistance was led by Denikin but he was brought to a halt short of Orel . In the north, resistance led to the death of the Crimean Warlord .
 In the north, Yudenich led his troops to the suburbs of Petrograd, but was then driven back . In the south, he led troops to Petrograd but was driven back by the Bolsheviks . The Russian Revolution was a major success in Russia .
 Wrangel, taking over what was left of Denikin's forces, defended the area around Sevastopol for some time . Wrangel was forced to withdraw in November 1920 .
 Poles were attempting to gain as much as they could of Lithuania, White Russia and Ukraine . Meanwhile, the Poles were trying to get as much of Lithuania and White Russia .
 They got as far as Kiev but then had to withdraw as the Red Army advanced in turn towards Warsaw . The Red Army was advancing towards Warsaw, but had to pull out of Kiev .
 Under the Treaty of Riga in October 1920, 10 million Ukrainians and Russians were assigned to Polish rule . When the Poles regained the initiative Lenin decided to sue for peace .
 By the end of the year military operations had been over and the communist government was in control of what was left of Russia .
 The Russian Revolution was precipitated by pressures arising from the hardships experienced during the First World War . The revolution was one of the formative events of the 20th century .
 A popular uprising in March 1917 led to the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II and the creation of a liberal Provisional Government . Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies was forced to share power with the socialist Petrograd Socialist Party .
 As the revolution spread, soviets sprang up in many cities, peasants seized land from the gentry and soldiers deserted . The revolution spread across the world, with peasants seizing land from gentry .
 A dual system of government developed, with the soviets largely controlling those leaders who took their authority from the Provisional Government . The sovets were largely controlled by those who took control of the government .
 During the subsequent months the ideological rift between the two bodies widened, with the Provisional Government delaying the setting up of a Constituent Assembly (which was to decide on major economic and political policies), concentrating instead on continued war effort .
 In November 1917 the Bolsheviks carried out a successful coup, seizing control of the Winter Palace . The Winter Palace was the seat of the Provisional Government . The Bolsheviks seized control of Winter Palace in November 1917 .
 Lenin established a dictatorship of the proletariat and a one-party system . Lenin then set about establishing a dictatorship . Lenin set himself to establish a one party system and establish dictatorship .
 The new Bolshevik government arranged an armistice with the Central Powers in December 1917, formalized in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk .
 Under the terms of the treaty Russia relinquished control of its western territories . The treaty ended Russia relinquishing control of the western territories to Russia .
 The Red Army was initially pushed back, but its military superiority over the White armies enabled it to regain control of Central Asia, the Caucasus and Ukraine . However, territory was lost in the war with Poland in 1920 .
 This war did not spread the revolution into Europe, as Lenin had hoped it would . Lenin hoped to have spread revolution to Europe, but failed to spread it into Europe .
 The Soviet Union was founded in 1922 in the territories of the old empire . Outside Russia proletarian support for communism was limited to the Soviet Union .
 The New Economic Policy is based on concessions to the peasantry and a semi-market economy . However, revolts by peasants in the spring of 1921 forced him to introduce the new economic policy .
 Monufoduring bod recovered by 192B when the Fast Rve-Yeor Plan *m launched . The plan was launched on June 28, 2012 .
 Ihe succeeded in transforming Ihe Soviet economy, coaling hundreds of new mining, engine engine and metallwgkol enterprises in established industrial ureas .
 Many convinced communists saw it as a slide towards a capitalist society . NEP enabled Lenin to consolidate power, many convinced communists thought it was a slide . Lenin's NEP helped him consolidate power .
 The struggle for power among his closest followers was to be fought out partly on the issue of which policy should be taken as the true Leninist line . deportation to Siberia of kulaks helped control the peasantry . deportation was a key part of the struggle for Lenin's closest followers .
 It was, however, an economic disaster, leading to a catastrophic famine . It was the economic disaster that led to a devastating famine .
 The struggle was won by Stalin, who outmanoeuvred rivals such as Trotsky and Bukharin . Stalin launched his drive to catch up with the West in ten years with a return to centralization and utopianism .
 The First Five Year Plan was adopted in 1928 . Its aims were to develop heavy industry, collectivize agriculture and develop agriculture .
 Industrial advance was indeed impressi ve, although at the cost of enormous waste, inefficiency and suffering, as wildly over-optimistic targets for output were set . Industrial advance came at cost at the time of huge waste and suffering .
 The population of the big cities nearly doubled between 1928 and 1933 . The urban infrastructure could not keep pace with the population .
 Targets concentrated on heavy industry' and although they were not met, the economy was transformed . Targets were aimed at heavy industry, although they did not meet .
 Magnitogorsk, the Turksib railway, the Dneprostroi hydro-electric complex and the White Sea Canal all date from this time . Magnitovski, the . Turksib . railway . and the D.Nepro . Hydroelectric complex .
 First Five Year Plan saw a vast expansion of the concentration camps of the civil war . They were also all built partially with prison camp labour, for the First Five Years Plan .
 The forcible establishment of collective farms, with the the Soviet public until the late 1980s, was the main reason for collective farms .
 In 1939 the Stalin cult of personality was at its height and, to many sympathisers, this was indeed a brave new world . In 1939 Stalin was a dictator who had a 'cult of personality'
 Bolsheviks assumed revolution would spark off revolutions across Europe, and in 191M 9 il baked for a while if this would happen . The Bolsheviks assume this will spark off revolution across Europe .
 A soviet repuhlk in Hungary, led by Bela Run, survived five monlta in 1919, and Olivers in Bovarn and Slovakia lasted four and three weeks respectively . Olivers were also survived by a Hungarian repuhk led by Bela
 The Sparfokist uprising under Rosa Luxemburg in Berlin in January 1919 was crushed by the new Weimar Repubfc ontf further insurrections in German towns were unsuccessful . Strikes spread across Europe ham northern Holy to the Batik, bul Ihe European revolution the Bolsheviks
 From southern bases they embarked on lengthy journeys to the north, by way of the mountainous west . From their southern bases, they embarked upon lengthy journeys .
 The most famous known known as ""the Long March"" was that undertaken by the First Front Army, led by Mao Zedong . The most important march was that taken by the first Front Army of China . The Long March is the longest march China has ever made .
 Fourth Army (led by a political rival of Mao) was denied access to Yan-an and sent away to remote Gaotai . The Fourth Army suffered heavy losses after confronting some well-equipped Kuomintang troops .
 The Japanese were firmly in control of Manchuria (which they renamed Manchukuo) and were poised to launch a full-scale invasion and occupation of the rest of China in 1937 . Meanwhile, the Japanese, with the help of their Manchu collaborators, were poised for a full
 The most important and urgent goals for the new government were the unification and defence of the country, but they were not easily achieved . The new government will not be able to easily achieve the unification of the whole country, says David Cameron .
 President Yuan Shikai attempted to restore the monarchy by crowning himself emperor in December 1915 . Sun Yat-sen's presidential term lasted for barely six weeks after his inauguration in January 1912 . In December 1915, Yuan tried to crown himself emperor .
 The attempt was a failure, as was that made by General Zhang Xun and the dethroned Qing Emperor Xuantong in 1917 . The attempt to overthrow the Qing Emperor was also a failure .
 Both attempts, however, provided opportunities for local warlords to re-establish their power at the expense of central government . Local warlords have been able to take control of the country .
 Over the next 30 years, the Chinese Republic was in virtual anarchy . A fragile equilibrium existed between the various warlords and other interest groups . The Chinese Republic is now a virtual anarchy.
 The first North-South War broke out in 1917 and resulted in a chain reaction that led to full-scale civil war . North and South fought in a series of civil war between the two countries .
 Sun Yat-sen formed his own southern governments in Guangzhou in 1917, 1921 and 1923 . To challenge the authority of the northern warlords, he formed three governments in China .
 In 1924 Sun Yat-sen was invited to Beijing to discuss the possible unification of China . But he died there in March 1925 without concluding an agreement, and the second North-South War began the following year .
 The Kuomintang was nominally unified at the end of 1928 under the leadership of Chiang Kai-shek . It gradually gained control of strategic regions .
 It was not until the end of 1930 that real unification of the party was achieved through the military defeat by Chiang of a rival faction . Chiang's defeat of the rival faction was the only real unification achieved .
 For Chiang and the Kuomintang, the next main task was to deal with the Communists, who now had an effective command structure and were armed . The Communists had now now had effective command structures and armed .
 Despite the fact that both the Kuomintang and Communists had a nationalist goal, they were more often enemies than allies . The Communists were competing for the same power .
 Most early Communists were also radical nationalists, making them doubly threatening to Chiang’s regime . Many had been heavily involved in the activities of the Kuomintang under Sun Yat-sen .
 Chiang launched five military campaigns to suppress the Communists in a rural area of Jiangxi province . The communist “Central Soviet Area” was located .
 In October 1934 he finally succeeded in overpowering the Communists, forcing them to abandon their Jiangxi base . Under the leadership of Mao Zedong, they embarked on the Long March to the north . The Long March was a gruelling battle for China's independence .
 Chiang’s army was equally successful in expelling units of the Red Army from other Red Bases in the central region of the country . By 1936 the Communists who had survived the journey were confined to an area in the province of Shaanxi around the city of Yan-
 China developed a railway network during the first half of the 20th century . Despite the political and economic turmoil, China still developed a network of railway networks .
 China's railways provided transport for manufactured goods and metal ores produced by the Chinese . The Great Depression of 1929-33 saw many of the country's businesses fail or withdraw from China .
 During the 1930s, however, his aims were largely frustrated by domestic and international conditions . The 1930s was largely dominated by the rise of fascism .
 In particular, as Japan developed its imperialist policy towards mainland East Asia, successive Japanese governments turned their attention on a weak and fragmented China .
 The Communists, from their stronghold in Yan-an, turned their attentions to fighting the Japanese . The Communists turned their attention to fighting against the Japanese.
 They took the opportunity to play the nationalist card and thus rebuild their popularity . They proved themselves a dynamic and efficient political and military force, writes CNN's John Defterios .
 Chiang’s concentration on suppressing his domestic rivals was by now out of tune with the wishes of the general populace . In December 1936 two of Chiang's top military commanders mutinied in order to shift his attention to fighting the Japanese .
 This became known as the ‘Xi-an Incident’, and resulted in the first example of cooperation between the Kuomintang and Communists since Sun Yat-sen’s death . The first instance of cooperation was the first since the death of the late Sun Y
 In January 1941, the Kuomintang troops ambushed and annihilated the main force of the Communist-controlled New Fourth Army, thus demonstrating just how fragile this co-operation was . The Kuomintsang troops were ambushed in January 1941 .
 The war against the Japanese created opportunities for communist propaganda, recruitment and military training . The civil war between the Kuomintang and Communists was resumed after the Japanese surrender .
 The Communists gained control of the mainland, the Kuomintang fled to Taiwan, and the People's Republic was established in October 1949 . The People’s Republic of China was established after the war .
 Putting the unification of China before the defence of China had cost the Kuomintang dearly . The unification of the country's unification before defence had cost them dearly . Unification of China was a costly mistake .
 During the 1911 Revolution and the birth of the People’s Republic of China in 1949, the Chinese economy struggled to survive the civil wars, the Japanese occupation of large areas of the country and the mismanagement of the .
 The industrial powers relaxed their grip on the Chinese market, creating opportunities for local businesses to become established . This was largely due to the impact of the First World War and the Great Depression .
 While the Western gold standard collapsed during the Depression resulting in severe financial crises in the West China, which had its own silver standard, remained largely unaffected . China's silver standard was largely unaffected by the Depression .
 Sun Yat-sen trained as a doctor in the early 1890s, but later turned his attention to revolutionary activity . He was exiled between 1896 and 1911 before becoming the first President of the Republic of China in 1912 .
 In 1945, at the end of the Second World War, the Communists (backed by Soviet troops) were the first to move into areas previously colonized by the Japanese .
 They quickly established a strong foothold in the northeast (both militarily and in terms of popular support) from which to launch their offensive . The Kuomintang had spent much of the previous eight years in the southwest . They had spent most of that time in southwest .
 Rerce fighting ensued for three years, with only a temporary truce in 1946 . Only temporary truce was made in 1945 .
 Despite U.S. backing, Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang forces were eventually forced to retreat to Taiwan . Despite United States backing, the U.N. backed the move .
 Allhough elected lo the presidency in 1917 on the basis of proposed agrarian and social reforms, hb governrmafs foifure lo meel its prombes led lo hb overthrow and execution in 1920, ► Following Ihe declaration of war on Germany by the
 All Central American and Caribbean countries declared war on the Axb powers at the same time as the USA, and Mexico followed soon afterwards . Brazil sent naval units to the Allies and contributed substantial food and raw materials to the war effort .
 Most declared war averted war aver ibe next two years, but some hung bock until early 1945 . Failure to do so could lead la exclusion from the projected United Nations .
 The first halt of the 20th century saw many major changes in the economic and social structure of the countries of Latin America . Export-led growth based on the production of primary products (mostly minerals or agricultural goods) was shown to be severely flawed .
 The oligarchies whose sociopolitical dominance had been well-nigh absolute for most of the 19th century found their control of the state challenged by an emerging middle class . At the same time, the oligarchs found their dominance challenged by a growing middle class in Russia .
 The majority of the population began to feature in both cultural and political debates . Meanwhile the majority of those excluded from participation in the state began to participate .
 Latin America's dependence on raw materials was felt as a result of the dislocation of world trade during the First World War . Latin America relied largely on foreign banks for supplies of credit and on foreign shipping .
 Production fell and imports were in short supply, and there was a high level of mass unrest . Production fell, imports were short supply and mass unrest was widespread .
 The disadvantages of export-led growth became increasingly clear . Latin American economies, especially the smaller ones, found themselves over-reliant on one or two products . The prices of these products are vulnerable to fluctuations in the weather, the emergence of new centres of production .
 Economic growth tended to follow a ""boom-bust 1 * cycle" which made it difficult for countries to plan ahead or allocate resources rationally . Economic growth was followed by a 'boom boom' cycle, according to the OECD .
 The Wall Street Crash of 1929 led to the collapse of the world market on which Latin America had relied for its exports . Latin America relied heavily on the Wall Street crash of 1929 and the ensuing Depression .
 In the 1920s Latin American countries could do little more than try to defend themselves against the effects of the Depression . In the 1930s Latin America could only try to protect itself from the effects .
 Latin America needs to adopt an economic strategy of urgent industrialization, experts say . Latin America has a limited industrial base oriented towards the internal market . But a consensus began to develop at least in the more advanced economies .
 The outcome was to consolidate the political and economic dominance of a bourgeoisie committed to capitalist modernization . The outcome of the outcome was that the bourgeoisie would be committed to modernization .
 The revolution destroyed the political position of the oligarchy, and their economic strength was eroded over the next two decades by means of a programme of agrarian reform that redistributed landed estates .
 In all the major Latin American countries during the early decades of the 20th century, the issue of how to incorporate the majority of the population into national life was debated .
 Intellectuals and politicians became increasingly aware of the political importance of poorer sections of society . Intellectuals from the middle classes became increasingly conscious of the importance of the poor .
 Measures were taken in Mexico to improve the lot of the Indians . This did not necessarily mean that the poor themselves were treated any better .
 By the end of the 1920s it had effectively displaced the European powers from Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean . During the Second World War the United States administration ensured the production of raw materials necessary to the Allied war effort by means of Lend-Lease aid agreements .
 By tliis stage it was apparent to the governments of Latin America that only the United States could launch an effective defence of the western hemisphere .
 The rise of the military in Latin America was to have a major effect on Latin American polities after the Second World War . The military was a major factor in Latin American politics .
 The armed forces had begun a process of professionalization, mostly with the help of European advisers, which by the 1920s had given them a strong sense of corporate identity . With the consolidation of central state control in most countries during the late 19th century, the armed forces began a process
 At this stage the military was content to intervene only briefly in the political process, but it was increasingly acquiring the conviction to prove so detrimental to the maintenance of democracy in Latin America that it alone was the institution which could best serve the national interest .
 The United Stoles professed itself reluctant to become a colonial power dong the lines of some European awntries in Africa and Asia . However, it was anxious to proteef Its own ecanaroit interests in the Caribbean and Cenlral America .
 Depression caused industrial production in ihe United Stales and tan-nda lo decline by over 30 per cent . The Depression led to massive unempfoyrnenl, particularly in the Utirled Stales .
 People migrated in swrch of writ, some of vrhkh was o diretl result of US-gdvfcnuranT spending under ihe Hew Deal launched in 1933 . Some of the people migrated in the 1930s were forced to leave the U.S. and
 It is naliceable that the highest expenditure per capita was nal necessarily in those areas mosl depressed, such as the Deep South . However, it is not necessarily in areas where Democrat governmeni was anxious to win pdilkof support .
 Every country in Europe experienced a drop in industrial production during the Depression . The northeast of Europe was the worst hit .
 Millions of people lost their jobs, and many farmers and businesses were bankrupted . Millions of farmers lost jobs, many businesses bankrupted, and millions of people were left jobless .
 Industrialized nations and those supplying primary products were all affected in one way or another . Industrialized countries were affected in some way or more .
 In Germany and the U.S. industrial output fell by about 50 per cent, and between 25 and 33 per cent of the industrial labour force was unemployed . Between 25-33 per cent was unemployed in both countries .
 Depression was eventually to cause a complete turnaround in economic theory and government policy . The Depression was to eventually lead to a complete overhaul of economic theory .
 Governments and business people believed prosperity resulted from the least possible government intervention in the domestic economy, from open international economic relations with little trade discrimination, and from currencies that were fixed in value and readily convertible .
 The U.S. economy had experienced rapid economic growth and financial excess in the late 1920s . Initially the economic downturn was seen as simply part of the boom-bust-boom cycle . The main areas of the Depression were the Midwest and South .
 There had been serious over-production in agriculture, leading to falling prices and a rising debt among farmers . It also became clear that there had been over-produced in agriculture .
 At the same time there was a major banking crisis, including the “Wall Street Crash” in October 1929 . The crash was the result of a banking crisis at the time of the crash .
 The situation was aggravated by serious policy mistakes of the Federal Reserve Board, which led to a fall in money supply and further contraction of the economy . The situation has been aggravated by policy mistakes made by the Fed .
 The economic situation in Germany was made worse by the enormous debt with which the country had been burdened following the First World War . The country's economic situation was worsened by the huge debt burden following the war .
 It had been forced to borrow heavily in order to pay “reparations” to the victorious European powers, as demanded by the Treaty of Versailles . It was also forced to pay for industrial reconstruction and industrial reconstruction .
 When the American economy fell into depression, U.S. banks recalled their loans, causing the collapse of the German banking system . The collapse of Germany's banking system caused the collapse .
 Latin America was already suffering a depression in the late 1920s . Countries that were dependent on the export of primary products, such as Latin America, were already suffering from a depression .
 The supply of agricultural products was rising faster than demand, and prices were falling as a consequence . More efficient farming methods and technological changes meant that the supply of food was rising fast .
 Initially, the governments of the producer countries stockpiled their products, but this depended on loans from the USA and Europe . The governments of some of the world's largest producers stockpiled the products .
 The Depression spread rapidly around the world because of the responses made by governments were flawed . New interventionist policies are needed to prevent the spread of the Depression .
 When faced with falling export earnings they overreacted and severely increased tariffs on imports, thus further reducing trade . The Chinese government overreacting to the fall of export earnings and increased tariffs .
 NORWAY V ' IRELAND V ' NORTH AND IRARAINA V ' HUNGARY POLAND ■ROMANIA YUGOSLAVIA SPAIN PORTUGAL 7 ~ V ljuRKEYVFTF CHINA HONDURAS A
 Under the Gold Standard, currencies were linked to the value of gold . Governments were committed to maintaining fixed exchange rates . The Gold Standard was set up in the 1930s and 'fixed' currencies .
 During the Depression they were forced to keep interest rates high to persuade banks to buy and hold their currency . However, during the Depression, they had to keep rates high in order to keep banks to hold their currencies .
 Since prices were falling, interest-rate repayments rose in real terms, making it too expensive for both businesses and individuals to borrow . Interest-rate repayment rates are also too high for individuals and businesses to borrow from .
 International action to halt the Depression was impossible to achieve . The First World War had led to such political mistrust that international action was impossible . The Depression was the Depression's first major economic crisis .
 In 1931 banks in the U.S. started to withdraw funds from Europe, leading to the selling of European currencies and the collapse of many European banks . The collapse of European banks was the result of the withdrawal .
 At this point governments either introduced exchange control or devalued the currency (as in Britain) to stop runs .
 The Depression had profound political implications . The Depression was the Depression's first Depression in the US .
 In countries such as Germany and Japan, reaction to the Depression brought about the rise of the militarist governments who adopted the aggressive foreign policies that led to the Second World War .
 In countries such as the U.S. and Britain, government intervention resulted in the creation of welfare systems . The managed economies of the period following the Second World War.
 Roosevelt promised a ‘New Deal’ under which the government would intervene to reduce unemployment by work-creation schemes such as street cleaning and painting of post offices . Roosevelt became President in 1933 and promised a 'New Deal'
 Both agriculture and industry supported by policies to restrict output and increase prices . Agriculture and industry helped by policies aimed at limiting output and increasing prices .
 The most durable legacy of the New Deal was the great public works projects such as the Hoover Dam and the introduction by the Tennessee Valley Authority of flood control, electric power, fertilizer and even education to a depressed agricultural region .
 The New Deal was not, in the main, an early example of economic management, and it did not lead to rapid recovery . It did not, for the first time, lead to a rapid recovery from the Depression . It was not a good example of early economic management .
 Income per capita was no higher in 1939 than in 1929, although the government’s welfare and public works policies did benefit many of the most needy people . The government's welfare policies were not always as successful as they were in 1929 .
 The big growth in the U.S. economy was, in fact, due to rearmament, author says . Rearmament is the key to economic growth, he says .
 In Germany Hitler adopted policies that were more interventionist, developing a massive work-creation scheme that had largely eradicated unemployment by 1936 . In Germany, Hitler adopted an interventionist approach to the economy .
 In the same year, rearmament, paid for by government borrowing, started in earnest .
 Consumption was restricted by rationing and trade controls . In order to keep down inflation, consumption was restricted in order to stop inflation .
 By 1939 the Germans’ Gross National Product was 50 per cent higher than in 1929 . Increase was due mainly to the manufacture of armaments and machinery .
 German case is an extreme example of what happened virtually everywhere in the 1930s . The collapse of world trade is the result of the collapse of trade in Germany .
 The international economy broke up into trading blocs determined by political allegiances and currency in which they traded . Political allegiances were determined by the currency and political affiliations .
 Trade between the blocs was limited, with world trade in 1939 still below its 1929 level .
 Although the global economy did eventually recover from the Depression, it was at considerable cost to international economic relations and to political stability . The global economy eventually recovered, but it did not recover at all costs .
 Chile, for example, saw its exports drop by over 80 per cent, and India and Brazil suffered a fall of over 60 per cent . Chile, Chile, India and other Latin American countries also saw a drop in exports . Chile and Brazil saw a fall in exports by more than 80
 From 1931, countries began to leave the standard, leading to its total collapse by 1936 . From 1931 onwards, the standard collapsed .
 At the time this was seen as a disaster, it actually presented opportunities for recovery in many countries, allowing governments to intervene to create economic growth . Although at the . time this . presented opportunities to recovery in . many countries .
 By the 1920s, however, he had changed his views and used his considerable rhetorical powers to whip up popular support for his fascist policies of nationalism, anti-socialism and state control .
 In 1936 Hitler ordered troops into the Rhineland as a gesture of defiance . However, a plebiscite in Saarland in 1935 produced 90 per cent support for German rule . In 1936, the German government ordered troops to invade the region .
 In March 1938 the German Anschluss of Austria was achieved with support from Austrian fascists . In October, following the Munich Pact (drawn up by Britain, France, Germany and Italy), Germany took over all regions of Czechoslovakia .
 Czech government ceded the rest of Bohemia-Moravia in March 1939, with Slovakia becoming a German puppet state . Czechs ceded rest of Czech-Sludenburg territory to Germany in 1939 . Slovakia became a puppet state of the German-occupied Czech Republic .
 On 1 September the Germans began their attack on Poland, and the British and French declared war on 1 September . The Germans attacked Poland, but the French and British declared war .
 Poland was attacked from the east by the Soviet Union and heavily outgunned, was forced to surrender . They did not, however, send troops to aid Poland, which was attacked by the Soviets .
 Fascism arose in Europe during the years between the two world wars . Fascism was a political and socio-cultural phenomenon known as fascism in Europe .
 Its exact form varied from country to country, but it was most commonly characterized by chauvinistic nationalism coupled with expansionist tendencies, anticommunism and a ruthless repression of all groups presumed dissident . A mass party with a charismatic leader rose to power through legitimate elections, and a
 Mussolini possessed a talent for arousing enthusiasm and giving a sense of power and direction to a society in crisis . Mussolini was known for his ability to stir up enthusiasm and give direction to society .
 Through coercion, indoctrination and the creation of the cult of himself as ‘II Duce” , he was able to balance the different interests of his supporters .
 His nationalist rhetoric attracted war veterans, while his promise to deal with the threat of revolutionary socialism won the support of the lower middle classes and a proportion of peasants .
 Some workers saw fascist syndicates as an appealing alternative to socialist unions . Landowners and industrialists made large donations to fascist groups because they battered peasant and labour organizations into submission .
 The political establishment tolerated fascism and helped pave the way for Mussolini’s rise to power . With the “March on Rome” in 1922, Mussolini, now Prime Minister, signalled the beginning of a new era .
 Mussolini's foreign policy wavered between aggression and conciliation . Mussolini’s foreign policy was a model for Italy, but it was never fully achieved .
 He expanded Italy's Libyan territory in 1935 . In 1935 he launched a successful assault on Ethiopia . He also expanded Libya's territory .
 In 1935 Italy formed an accord with France and joined in condemnation of German rearmament before invading Ethiopia in October 1935 . In October 1935 Italy invaded Ethiopia, thereby alienating itself from both Britain and France .
 A rapprochement with Germany was inevitable, and in 1936 the “Rome-Berlin Axis” was formed . In 1936, the ‘Rome’s Axis’ was formed, with the help of Germany .
 Italy joined Germany in assisting the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War, further alienating itself from the rest of Europe . In May 1939, Italy signed the “Pact of Steel” with Germany .
 Hitler’s rise to power in Germany can be seen partly as a product of the harshness of the Treaty of Versailles . The treaty placed an economic noose round the neck of the Weimar Republic . Fascism in Germany was partly a result of the treaty of Vers
 In 1932 it became the largest single party in the world . Hitler was appointed Chancellor in January 1933 . In 1933 he was appointed as Chancellor of Germany .
 The regime’s emphasis on ideological conformity led to heavy censorship, while the Nazis mobilized the German youth to provide a new base of mass support .
 Hitler’s economic plans aimed to reduce the level of unemployment . Germany was intended to achieve self-sufficiency both in industry and agriculture, a goal by no means realized .
 He managed to end German isolation in Europe through the Anglo-German Naval Pact of 1935 and to remilitarize the Rhineland in 1936 . With the backing of an army that had increased to more than twice the size allowed by the Treaty of Versailles, he managed to
 In 1938 Austria was virtually incorporated into the Reich, as was the Germanpopulated Sudetenland . The act was accepted by Britain and France with the signing of the Munich Agreement .
 Portugal allowed and the German supply lines across its territory . Semi-fascist Portugal allowed the Germans to use its territory in the war .
 Hitler invaded Poland on 1 September 1939 . Confident that Britain would not intervene, he invaded Poland in 1939 . The invasion was expected to be a stand-off .
 The Spanish Civil War arose following the collapse in 1930 of Miguel Primo de Rivera’s seven-year dictatorship . The three-year rule of Prime Minister Azana provoked bitter opposition on the part of the Establishment .
 Azana’s government was succeeded by a series of centre-right coalition governments, which dismantled his reforms and resulted in social unrest . In 1933, Azana's government was followed by a number of coalition governments which dismantled reforms .
 Popular Front won the elections and Azana formed a new government, intending to reintroduce all his earlier reforms . Azana's government is intended to introduce all his reforms .
 He was supported in his campaign by the fascist Falange, a party founded by de Rivera .
 The conflict attracted international interest, with Italy and Germany supporting the Nationalists and the Soviet Union supporting the Republicans . The Soviet Union supported the Republicans and Italy supported the Nationalist .
 Neither Britain nor France were prepared to confront Hitler over his assistance to Franco . The German bombing of Guernica caused an international outcry, but neither France nor Britain were prepared .
 When the Soviet Union decided to end its assistance to the Republicans, the Nationalist victory was assured . The Soviet Union ended its support for the Republican Party .
 By spring 1939 Franco’s government was recognized by most of Europe, and Spain entered an era of ruthless repression . Franco's government in Spain entered a period of brutal repression . The Spanish government was officially recognized in 1939 .
 During the 1920s and 1930s right-wing dictatorial regimes were established across Europe and the Iberian Peninsula . Right-wing dictatorships were established in Europe .
 Many dictators, such as Horthy in Hungary and King Carol of Romania, regarded fascist organizations as a threat to their rule . However, many dictators considered fascist organizations to be a threat .
 They were undoubtedly influenced in their rhetoric and practice by the German and Italian models, but also shaped by each country’s indigenous features . They were influenced by each other's indigenous features, such as their rhetoric .
 Many dictators were uncharismatic figures, who actually regarded fascist movements and organizations as a threat to their rule . Many of these dictators were not charismatic, but uncharistic figures, say historians .
 Only the Nazi dictatorship, with its aggressive expansionism, racism, and nationalist and militarist ideology, represented the full expression of fascism . The Nazi dictatorship represented the Nazis' aggressive expansionist, racist expansionism and militarism .
 For three years the war was concentrated on the Eastern Front, with German troops sweeping across the western Soviet Union . After Germany's invasion of western Europe, and its attempts to bomb Britain into submission, the war ended in 1945 .
 During 1942, however, they became bogged down, with losses in the north outweighing gains in the south . In 1942, they were losing ground in northern Europe .
 In February 1943 the Soviet Union broke the siege of Stalingrad and the Germans were forced to retreat . The siege was broken in February 1943 .
 At the same time, their forces in North Africa were fleeing to the safety of Italy . At the time, they were also fleeing to Italy .
 The Germans fought a strong rearguard action in the east, Italy and, from June 1944, in western Europe . Allied troops eventually met up just west of Berlin in May 1945, with the Allied troops meeting up just .
 It began as a struggle for supremacy in Europe, but soon engulfed North Africa, the Atlantic and the Soviet Union . It began in Europe but then spread to North Africa and the Atlantic .
 Pearl Harbor and Germany’s declaration of war against the U.S. became truly global in December 1941 . World War II was the first global war of its kind .
 The French and British decision to contest Hitler’s bid for European hegemony, after his invasion of Poland, took him by surprise .
 France and Britain could do little to prevent Germany and the Soviet Union dismantling Poland under the German-Soviet Non-Aggression Pact of 23 August 1939 .
 Britain, France and the Polish government in exile were confident that Hitler could be forced by economic pressure into compromise . Nevertheless, the Allies at this stage were confident .
 During the next year Berlin consolidated and extended its political influence and control . Berlin committed and extended its political influence and constrained control .
 Hitler’s fascist partner, Mussolini, brought Italy into the war on 10 June . The ‘Axis’ was further strengthened with the signing of the Tripartite Pact between Germany, Italy and Japan on 27 September .
 The Balkan states soon became German satellites . The remaining neutrals were forced to grant substantial economic concessions .
 Britain refused to sue for peace and withstood the Blitz over the autumn of 1940 . Against expectations, Britain refused .
 Unable to mount an invasion of Britain, the German foreign ministry and navy embarked on an “indirect strategy” against Britain . The German government embarked on a ‘direct strategy’ against the UK .
 Germany's submarine fleet was given the task of severing Britain’s tenuous communications with the neutral United States . Germany's submarines were tasked with severing ties with the U.S.
 U-boats cut deep into Britain’s reserves and posed a danger until the early summer of 1943 . However, the indirect strategy failed to meet German expectations .
 Italian efforts in 1940-41 to carve out a Mediterranean empire complicated rather than complemented Germany’s war plans . Moreover, Italian efforts to carve-out an empire in the Mediterranean also complicated the war plans of Germany .
 Britain’s maritime and imperial resources allowed it to inflict a series of humiliating setbacks on Italian forces in Egypt and Greece .
 Hitler was drawn into campaigns of little strategic importance and marginal economic benefit, which ultimately delayed his invasion of the Soviet Union by several weeks . Hitler was compelled to come to the aid of his ally and was drawn .
 During the final months of the war a race took place between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union for control of German territory . Part 5 of this week's World War II coverage of the final stages of the conflict .
 The two armies eventually met west of the German capital Berlin and the Austrian capital Vienna . The battle was between the German and Austrian armies .
 Millions of civilians were enslaved in German farms and factories, where many of them died . Millions of people died . The Soviet Union controlled the surrounding territories .
 As military resistance crumbled, industrial plant was relocated away from advancing German forces . Industrial plant relocated to be moved away from the advancing Germans .
 Aid was not critical, but it did cover important shortfalls in transportation and communications . Aid was forthcoming from Britain and the United States, but not critical . It did cover transportation, communications and communications problems .
 On learning that Japan had decided against attacking the Soviet Union in the east, Stalin transferred troops from Siberia to meet the German attacks in 1941 . On learning of Japan's decision not to attack the Soviet Soviet Union, Stalin moved troops out of Siberia .
 Germany made impressive gains in the south, in an effort to control the Soviet Union’s oil resources . The retaking of Stalingrad by the Soviets in February 1943 marked a turning point for Germany .
 Soviet success at the massive tank battle of Kursk in July began Germany’s long retreat westwards, which ended when Berlin fell to Soviet forces two years later . The battle began in July 1944 and ended in 1945 .
 Second World War in Europe was predominantly a struggle between the Soviet Union and Germany . In terms of the number of casualties suffered and of the resources expended, the war was mainly a struggle for the Soviets .
 By the end of the war some six million Jews, along with hundreds of thousands of other victims, had been gassed in the death camps or starved, executed or worked to death .
 Of those that survived the camps, many died as they were forced to march away from the advancing Allies . Of those who survived, many of them died in the camps as they tried to escape the advancing forces .
 Stalin demanded immediate support from his western allies . The demand for a second front was met by Stalin in the early 1930s .
 Until late 1943 the contribution of Britain’s strategic bombing offensive was meagre . The contribution was maintained largely to placate Soviet demands for a second front .
 Allied forces finally ejected Axis forces from North Africa by midMay 1943 . After five months of fighting, the two Allied pincers met outside Tunis . Allied forces were forced out of North Africa in May 1943 .
 Britain insisted on mounting landings in Sicily and Italy against the wishes of the Soviet Union and the U.S. The Soviet Union favoured landing in northern France .
 These campaigns knocked Italy out of the war, but failed to provide a strategic breakthrough into central Europe .
 U-boat menace to the Atlantic convoys meant that the Western Allies felt sufficiently confident to create a second front by landing troops in Normandy in June 1944 .
 Despite the Allies’ massive economic, military, intelligence and technical superiority, dogged German resistance forced the Allies to fight every step of the way . Despite the Allied’s massive economic and military superiority, the Germans fought back .
 In the face of inevitable defeat, an opposition cabal tried to assassinate Hitler in July 1944, but was quickly crushed . Hitler was quickly defeated in 1944 .
 Only in the Balkans and France did armed resistance to German domination meet with any real success . In the Balkans, only in France and the Balkans did resistance meet with success .
 Nazi Germany had to be ground down by aerial bombardment and huge land offensives . Nazi Germany was ground down in 1945 .
 The political consequences of the total defeat of Germany were enormous . Germany's defeat of the Nazis was enormous .
 The war was a blow to western European civilization and confidence from which it has struggled to recover . Culturally, the war dealt a blow that has left Europe struggling to recover from .
 Second World War spelt the end of European influence across the globe . Though it began, and was largely fought, in Europe, it ended the war in 1945 .
 Nazi Germany retained control in its conquered territories by installing puppet governments in the Balkans and its own administrations in Poland and the western Soviet Union . The puppet governments were installed by Nazi Germany in its territories .
 Italian and German troops jointly occupied Greece until the Italian surrender in 1943 . The Italian government of Greece was overthrown by the Nazis in 1944 .
 Concentration and death camps were constructed, to which ""undesirables" and Jews were transported from across Europe . Concentration and death camps were constructed .
 In September 1931, the Japanese army set about seizing Manchuria as a first step in the construction of an economically self-sufficient bloc under its control .
 By the end of 193ft Japan had seized large areas of China and had forced Chiang Kai-shek's government to retreat to Chongqing .
 Despite the scale of the defeat, the Chinese refused to surrender a fact which Japan blamed on Western support . Japan blamed the Chinese for their refusal to surrender .
 Fierce fighting look place fallowing the Japanese invasion af China in 1937, but despite a series of defeats, the Chinese refused la surrender . 7Kb rale of ihe Japanese advance in Southeast Asia .
 Dutch, British and U.S. territories fell like dominoes until Japan over-stretched itself in the Battle of Midway in June 1942 . French Indochina, under the Vichy government, was sympathetic to Japan, as was Thailand .
 Japan ruled over its new territories with an iron Ftsl . It engaged in atrocities against native populations and European prisoners of war .
 The U.S. signed the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy . At the same time, the Pact was designed to deter the United States from intervening in East Asia . The Pact was formed in an effort to deter American intervention .
 U.S. and Britain introduced a policy of economic sanctions, culminating in an embargo on oil exports to Japan in 1941 . In response, the United States and Britain imposed an oil embargo on Japan .
 The Japanese launched a rapid offensive into the western Pacific and Southeast Asia in the hope of establishing an impenetrable defensive perimeter . Faced with economic collapse or war with the Allies, the Japanese chose the latter .
 The speed and effectiveness of the Japanese attack, symbolized most notably by the assault on Pearl Harbor, took the US, British and Dutch forces by surprise and led to a series of humiliating defeats for the Western Allies in the first six months of WWII .
 Japan’s victories led it to portray itself as the ‘liberator’ of Asia from European imperialism . The victories led to the "liberator" of Asia, Japan .
 During the course of the war nominally independent states were established in Burma and the Philippines . Japan’s ally Thailand was allowed to annex areas of Indochina, Burma and Malaya .
 In reality, Japan ruled over its newly conquered territories with an iron fist . It engaged in atrocities against the native population and European civilian detainees and prisoners of war .
 Japan suffered its first major reverse when its naval expedition to seize the island of Midway ended in disaster with the loss of four aircraft carriers . In June 1942, Japan suffered a major defeat in its attempt to seize Midway island .
 Japan’s war effort was undermined by the fact that it lacked the resources to replace its losses, with United States submarines cutting the supply routes to Japan .
 By 1945 it was clear that Japan was on the retreat, but the Americans feared that it would still cost many more lives to bring about its defeat . By 1945, the Americans had already lost more lives than they feared .
 This was confirmed when the invasion of Okinawa in the spring of that year led to 10,000 U.S. casualties . The invasion of the island led to the death of more than a million Americans .
 By the summer hopes had turned to the use of the newly developed atomic bomb . At first it was hoped that conventional bombing of Japanese cities would persuade Japan to capitulate .
 The dropping of atomic bombs in early August on Hiroshima and Nagasaki resulted in the death of 140,000 people . The Soviet invasion of Manchuria proved to be the final blows for Japan, and on 15 August Emperor Hirohito announced the country’s surrender .
 Although Japan’s attempt to carve out an empire had been defeated, the region did not return to the pre-war status quo . The region was not fully recovered from the Japanese occupation of the Japanese capital .
 For the U.S. the war demonstrated the importance of the western Pacific to its national security . It led to a permanent commitment of American forces to the region . For the United States the war .
 Japan eschewed militarism and sought economic expansion by peaceful means . Japan, meanwhile, eschewed military means and sought to expand its economy .
 Japan surrendered on 15 August 1945, following the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Its troops still occupied a large part of Southeast Asia .
 The 15 constituent republics of the Soviet Union were formed in the 1920s and 1930s . They were formed largely along ethnic lines, largely on ethnic lines . T
 The republics were dominated by the Russian Federation, by far the largest and wealthiest of the republics . The Russian Federation is the country's largest and richest state .
 Russia was divided for administrative purposes into regions that had various degrees of local autonomy . Russia was itself divided into regions with varying degrees of autonomy . The regions were divided into Russia's regions and regions with various degree of autonomy.
 T he Soviet Union emerged from the Second World War victorious, but devastated by the loss of 26 million people .
 Collective farms that had been destroyed during the war were reinstated . Efforts were made to develop heavy industry, and the government returned to the use of terror as a way of controlling the population .
 The economic development of the Eastern bloc was regulated from 1949 onwards by the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance . Defence aims were unified in 1955 with the signing of the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed in 1955 .
 Only Yugoslavia, where Tito had come to power independently of the Red Army, developed a nonStalinist form of communism . Tito came to power independent of the Soviet-backed Communist Party in Yugoslavia .
 Khrushchev and Brezhnev Stalin died in March 1953 and by 1956, following a secret speech criticizing Stalin, had triumphed over his rivals . Stalin's death was the death of the Soviet Union .
 Political prisoners were released from the labour camps, and fresh emphasis was placed on the importance of agriculture, housing and the production of consumer goods . Political prisoners released from labour camps were released .
 In order to achieve this economic change of direction at least partial decentralization was considered necessary . The government considered decentralization necessary to achieve the economic change .
 Increased liberalization led to dissident movements in Russia and revolts across Eastern Europe . The country's liberalization policies led to a series of revolts in Eastern Europe and Russia .
 Khrushchev improved relations with Yugoslavia, but his policies led to a split with China by 1960 . His policies also led to an increase in tensions with Yugoslavia and China .
 Soviet ^ 5m* anted interwti» m Bfalnsl FINLAND j&sdtholrr, ' ^TJsiniti Romania BOaKMtiL 1 BULGARIA A 1 Communist Eastern Europe 1945-39 m rqnii
 The Soviet Union then settled into a period characterized by a return to a centralized economy . quotas that enforced quantity rather than quality were enforced . Soviet Union settled into an era of centralized economy, with quotas enforcing quality .
 With growing competition in armaments and space technology, the Cold War intensified . The Soviet Union’s intervention on the side of the socialists in the Afghan Civil War was the result .
 The post-war period saw a series of grandiose plans for scientific management of the economy . Post-war plans saw a whole series of scientific management plans for the country's economy .
 Stalin’s plan for the ‘Transformation of Nature’ was shelved in 1953 . Khrushchev’�s “Virgin Lands” scheme to grow maize across northern Kazakh SSR was implemented .
 The resulting soil erosion ruined 40,000 square kilometres of land and forced the Soviet Union to import grain . The Soviet Union was forced to imports grain from the USSR .
 A plan in 1971 for a giant computer grid to manage the whole Soviet economy was never implemented, and neither was the scheme to build a canal system that would have reversed the flow of several Siberian rivers in order to irrigate Central Asia . A canal system was also planned to reverse the flow
 Since 1917 "progress" had been envisaged as smoking factory chimneys and increased industrial production . Since 1917 “progress” had been envisioned as smoking factories chimneys .
 Soviet economic growth rates of 5-6 per cent in the 1960s dropped to 2. percent in 1976-4JG . In the early 1980s, growth rates dropped to 0 per cent and to 0% in the early 80s .
 Defence costs, the Afghan War and support for the countries of Eastern Europe were more than the economy could sustain . The economy was hit hard by the war and the support for Eastern Europe .
 Rising expectations and a widespread black market led to labour unrest . Rising expectations led to the rise of the black market in the Philippines .
 Subsidies on food and housing took up large parts of the budget, and poor-quality consumer goods left people with little on which to spend their wages . Money was put into private savings instead of spending it on food or housing .
 Chernobyl nuclear power plant explosion brought home to the world by the explosion at Chernobyl in 1986 . A larger, hut unreported, nuclear accident had already occurred in 1957 at the test site ‘Chelyabinsk 40” in the Urals .
 In Eastern Europe economic decline also set in from the mid-1970s onwards . Economic decline set in in Eastern Europe from mid-70s onwards.
 Heavy industry was cenlrnl to the development ol the Soviet economy, but caused severe sail and water pollution m many areas . As loans from Western hanks became harder to arrange, and the Soviet Union ended its subsidized oil exports in the mid-1980s, wages T
 Even empty wastes of northern Russia were exploited lor the valuable coal, oil and melds bunds bund there fell by 17 per cent in 1980-86 .
 Declining living standards, environmental issues, pollution and related health concerns heightened demands for a release from Soviet domination . Decline living standards and environmental issues led to demands for the release of Soviet Union .
 Pipelines were leaking oil into the permafrost across northern Russia . Most of Russia’s major rivers were polluted, in particular the Yenisei estuary around Norilsk . Grand projects, such as the building of the Baikal-Amur railway, enabled the
 Damage to Lake Baikal from industrial effluent was an issue on which a growing green lobby focused . Aral Sea lost 75 per cent of its volume and 50 per cent its area between 1960 and 1989 due to overuse of its tributaries for irrigation .
 Western Europeans experienced an unprecedented increase in material prosperity in the five decades after the end of the Second World War .
 By the end of the 20th century, average per capita incomes were three and a half times as high as in 1950 . The income gap between “rich” and “poor” countries within Western Europe was much smaller than in the immediate postwar years .
 The rise in the material standard of living was associated with the increasing integration and interdependence of the European economies . The relative importance of the agricultural sector declined in the past decade, writes Simon Tisdall .
 At least 40 million people died throughout Europe during the Second World War . There was extensive damage to factories, housing, transport and communications systems .
 In 1945 Western European countries were faced with implementing the transition from war to peace, reconstructing industries and re-establishing international trade and payments . Western Europe was faced with the transition between war and peace .
 The immediate post-war period saw severe food shortages and a large number of displaced people . The immediate aftermath of the Second World War saw large food shortages .
 The European Economic Community was set up by the Treaty of Rome in 1957 . It was renamed the European Community in 1967 . The European Community was established in 1957 and renamed in 1967.
 European Monetary System came into force in 1979 . As a first step towards stabilizing European currencies, the system was created in 1978 .
 Treaty of European Union was signed at Maastricht in February 1992 . Single European currency system launched on 1 January 1999 . Single currency system was launched in 1999 .
 Western Europe relied heavily on imports, especially from the U.S., but had neither currency reserves nor export dollar earnings to pay for them . A major constraint, however, was that Western Europe had no currency reserves or export earnings to fund imports .
 To preserve their foreign currency reserves, European governments restricted imports from neighbouring countries, resulting in a low level of intra-European trade . European governments restrict imports to preserve their currency reserves .
 From 1948 to 1951 ERP funds enabled the countries of Western Europe to continue importing goods from the United States, and thus helped speed up the process of economic recovery . ERP Funds enabled the West to import goods from America .
 The U.S. put pressure on Western Europe to build and maintain constitutional democracy as a bulwark against the spread of communism and the revival of fascism . In return, the United States put pressure in return for Western Europe's support for democracy .
 This restored limited convertibility between European currencies while allowing member countries to maintain controls on imports from the dollar area . The European Union agreed to allow the currency to be convertible between member countries and the dollar .
 By 1958 the EPU had fulfilled its role, but the rapid expansion in trade had resulted in the increasing integration of the European economies a process that many sought to take further . The EPU was founded in 1958, but it has since been disbanded .
 Early French post-war plans for reconstruction called for the expansion of the national steel industry . The French government relied heavily on unrestricted access to coal from the German Ruhr area .
 France suggested the formation of a common market for coal and steel in 1950 . In 1950 France suggested that the market should be formed for steel and coal .
 The European Economic Community began to operate in 1958 . Its success encouraged member states to push economic integration further to create a customs union and common market .
 This increased the liberalization of internal trade and provided access to a larger market, while offering a protective shield against non-members . It also enabled the implementation of common policies. This increased .
 Unlike the EEC/EC/EU, with its supranational institutional arrangements, EFTA was intergovernmental in nature . EFTA is the successor to the European Economic and Social Protection Agency .
 EFTA gradually lost its significance with many of its members eventually joining the economically and politically more powerful Community . EFTA eventually lost its membership to the more powerful Economic and Political Community Community .
 Between 1950 and the mid-1990s all of Western Europe experienced an increase in material prosperity . Despite variations in the rates of economic growth between countries, the rate of growth varied .
 By 1994 the gap in per capita income between the poorest and the richest economies was much smaller than in 1950 . By 1994, the gap between the richest and the poorest economies was also smaller .
 After 1973 practically all these economies experienced a slow-down in growth . The extent, however, differed between countries . After 1973, growth slowed significantly in some countries .
 Closer economic integration was accompanied by gradual, though incomplete, political convergence . Post-war politics was an incomplete but successful period of economic integration .
 Institutions of parliamentary democracy had never previously been firmly established in southern Europe . Institutions were never previously established in the southern European region .
 The army-backed dictatorship of General Franco in Spain lasted until his death in 1975 . It was followed by the restoration of the monarchy of King Juan Carlos in 1977 .
 Greece experienced a bitter civil war, a military coup in 1967, and seven years of dictatorship that gave way to a democratic system only in 1974 . The country's democratic system was only formed in 1974 after a coup in 1966 .
 Elsewhere in Western Europe democratic systems did not escape problems . Elsewhere, democratic systems failed to escape problems such as in Italy .
 Post-war France went through frequent changes of government until stability was achieved under Charles de Gaulle in 1950s .
 Italy endured a serious crisis of corruption at all levels of government in the 1990s . Italy has had many short-lived governments throughout the second half of the 20th century .
 1960s saw short-lived left-wing activism, especially in Italy and Germany . Left-wing activists were active in Italy, Germany and Italy .
 In Germany the environmentalist Green movement had limited electoral success in the 1970s . In Germany, the Green movement was a relatively successful political party .
 The challenge to consitutional democracy in the 1980s and 1990s came from extreme right-wing, essentially racist, movements . These movements were most successful electorally in France and Italy .
 Through most of the period from 1945 to the end of the century, power swung like a pendulum, or was shared, between moderate social democratic or Labour parties .
 This was the case under voting systems based on proportional representation that encouraged negotiation between political groupings and, as in Britain, a ‘first-past-the-post’ adversarial system that encouraged competition between them . This was a system that encourages competition between political groups .
 Western Europe experienced particularly rapid economic growth from 1950 until the early 1970s . Average annual growth of GDP PER CAPITA THROUGHOUT Western Europe til ▼ Western Europe until the 1980s .
 The large productivity gap separating Europe and the U.S. in the late 1940$ was rapidly reduced . Repair to war-damaged economies and changes in economic policy also created growth .
 The price of raw materials remained low and there was little competition from the Asian economies . There is little competition in the region from Asian economies, analysts say .
 From the early 1970s onwards, however, Western European economies continued to grow, but did so at a much slower rate . From the 1980s onwards the Western European economy grew at a slower rate than in the 1970s .
 By the end of the century California was not only the most populous state but also an international economic powerhouse .
 Over 87 per cent of the population were white and just over 10 per cent were African American . Just over a tenth of those who attended the event were African Americans .
 The life expectancy of an American born in 1900 was 47 years . Only 4 per cent of the population was over 65 years old, according to the Census .
 In the years before the motorcar the railroads served as the lifeblood of the nation . A large percentage still lived on farms, and a large percentage of the population still lived there .
 Over the coming decades great social, racial, technological and economic changes were to create a very different country . Over the years, social and racial changes would be to create an entirely different country.
 During the 20th century huge numbers of Americans migrated to the west and southwest in search of new jobs and greater opportunities .
 The percentage employed in services increased from 40 to 76 per cent between 1920 and 1998 . This mobility of labour helped the USA to remain a more flexible and productive economic power than other countries .
 Employment in agriculture fell from 25 to 5 per cent and in industry from 35 to 19 per cent . Employment in industry also fell from 35 per cent to 19per cent .
 Immigration to the USA reached a peak in the early years of the 20th century . From the 1920s onwards a more restrictive approach was adopted . Immigration and civil rights
 A quota system was introduced for each nationality, based on the percentage of the existing U.S. population of that nationality . The quotas were introduced in the 1930s and '90s . The quota was based on a percentage of existing United States population .
 This enabled northern European immigrants to be favoured at the expense of those from other regions of the world . Northern European immigrants were favoured more than those from the continent .
 In 1965 the quota system was replaced by a permitted annual total of immigrants . In 1965, quotas were replaced by an annual annual number of immigrants.
 Hispanic Americans (people originally from Latin America, Cuba and Puerto Rico) in United States society . There was an increase in the number of Hispanic Americans in U.S society .
 By the end of the century they made up over 10 per cent of the population . They were the fastest-growing group in the country . They made up the fastest growing group in Britain .
 The size of other ethnic groups also increased dramatically, especially those from Japan, the Philippines, South and Southeast Asia .
 In 1900 African Americans were politically and socially marginalized . The majority lived on farms in the Deep South where their parents or grandparents if not they themselves had been slaves .
 Most southern states, politically dominated by whites, enforced segregation in the South . While they were supposedly guaranteed equal rights by the constitution, most southern states enforced segregation .
 In many places they were discouraged from voting by poll taxes, literacy tests and other intimidatory tactics . Voters are encouraged to vote by literacy tests, intimidation tactics .
 The industrial boom of the early 20th century created a need for factory workers in the northeast and Midwest . Two world wars and two world wars in the early 1900s created the need for workers .
 With the exception of Henry Ford’s automobile plants, African Americans were usually given less prestigious and lower-paid jobs than whites . Political power was still curtailed .
 The Civil Rights movement began in the 1950s with pressure both from above and below . The civil rights movement began with pressure from both sides of the aisle .
 Brown v Board of Education attacked the notion of state segregation . In 1954 the famous Supreme Court decision Brown v . Board of . Education was the subject of the famous Brown v. Board decision .
 The South was forced to confront the issue of racial inequality . Subsequently, not only the South but the USA as a whole faced it .
 The 1960s were particularly turbulent, with legal victories for equality being won in the face of continuing racism . In the 1960s, legal victories were won against continued racism in America .
 At the beginning of the 20th century the country’s two major political parties, the Republicans and the Democrats, were more sectional groupings often with competing interests than ideological entities . Republicans and Democrats were more part of the nation's two major parties .
 The Democrats were loyally supported by the bulk of southern whites, for reasons stretching back to Republican rule during the Civil War . They were also often backed by farmers from poorer western states and different ethnic coalitions in the large cities .
 They began a boycott of the dty's segregated bus system . Insled more than o o year, ending in a legal victory .
 In 1960 sit-in protests slatted in restaurants and retail pullets, while in 1961 Freedom Rides buses filled with protesters began crossing the Deep South . In 1963, 250,000 people gathered in Washington, D.C., for the first time .
 African-American discontent was expressed in urban riots from the mid-1960s onwards, spreading la Grifornia on ihe wesl coast . Urban riots spread across the U.S.
 Native Americans were scattered throughout the West, on reservations and territories to which they had been forcibly resettled in the 19th century . Native Americans are scattered in the West on reservations, territories that they were forced to relocate .
 Hispanic Americans lived mainly in states that had been part of Mexico before 1848 . Hispanic Americans were born in 1848 states that were part of the country .
 Non-white percentage of population in northeastern industrial regions has increased markedly . In California, Texas and New Mexico, non-white population has increased due to influx of migrant workers .
 Successive United States governments have placed restrictions on immigration, starting with the law of 1862 prohibiting Chinese immigration . Successive U.S. governments have put restrictions on Chinese immigration starting in 1862 .
 There were other, smaller, parties, including the Socialists, but they always performed poorly at election time .
 Roosevelt’s massive increases in government social spending caused both they and many working-class white voters to switch allegiance to the Democrats . Previously, when allowed to vote, almost always supported the Republicans .
 From the 1930s, Democrats regularly won a majority of the seats in Congress, especially in the House of Representatives . As a result, the Democrats took over the Republicans’ previous role as the natural party of government .
 The parties have now developed more distinctive ideologies . Republicans on the whole support fewer taxes, less government regulation and smaller government welfare plans than the Democrats .
 Ethnic minorities are encouraged by some to maintain their separate identities . Other factions have fought this idea, believing that it could undermine the cohesion of the U.S.
 His policy of passive resistance, to which he adhered, was based on the teachings of Gandhi . He adhered in the face of criticism from more militant African-American leaders .
 He was a powerful orator, famous for his ""I have a dream" speech, first delivered in 1963 . He was also known for his 'I Have a Dream' speech .
 Dr King was assassinated in 1968 . Despite important legislative victories won by the civil rights movement, protests became violent in the mid-1960s .
 Iran has sometimes considered it necessary to employ force to defend its interests . Economic backing or, conversely, the threat of trade sanctions has been sufficient to achieve its objectives .
 The U.S. dominated the world at the end of the Second World War . The United States dominated the globe .
 World's largest navy and air force dwarfed all other national economies . It dwarfed the world's largest economy .
 With most major European and Asian countries devastated by war, the U.S. produced half the world’s goods in 1945 . The United States produced half of the world's goods in that year .
 The question facing the United States was what it should do with its tremendous power . The U.S. was faced with what it would do with that power .
 Before the Second World War, U.S. foreign policy had been unpredictable . Before World War II, foreign policy was more unpredictable .
 With much of the country firmly isolationist, there was no national consensus as to what part the U.S. should take in world affairs . Much of the United States is firmly isolated .
 Most Americans seemed content to play a dominant role in North, Central and South America . But they had little interest in intervening in conflicts elsewhere . Most Americans were content with the role of the U.S.
 President Truman and Secretary of State George Marshall considered isolationism was untenable given the strength of the Soviet Union . After the Second World War many of those responsible for U.S. foreign policy, such as President Truman, considered isolation .
 Although the United States and the Soviet Union had been allies during the war, this relationship had been forced on them by necessity and a huge ideological rift still existed . The U.S. and Soviet Union were allies in the war .
 In the period following the end of the war the Soviets increased their domination of Eastern Europe . Many Americans worried that if the USA withdrew its forces from Western Europe the USSR would eventually dominate the whole continent .
 The USA was alarmed at the prospect of communist governments restricting trade with the non-communist world . The USA, committed to free enterprise, was dependent on Europe for a large part of its export trade .
 The Soviet government, led by Stalin, was suspicious of a Western Hemisphere dominated by the USA . Likewise, the Soviet government expressed doubt that capitalism and communism could peacefully coexist for long .
 The perceived threat posed by the Soviet Union eventually proved decisive in the development of the United States . The Cold War years were crucial to the U.S. economic and military world power .
 Truman committed the USA to a policy of “containment’, involving resistance to the spread of communism anywhere in the world . President Truman committed . USA to 'containment' in the 1950s, with resistance to communist .
 In 1949 the USA played a key role in the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The organization committed it to defending Western Europe . The U.S. is one of the world's most powerful nations .
 There was a slight thaw in relations during the 1970s, when the USA and the USSR adopted a policy of ‘detente’ The two countries tried to establish closer links of mutual understanding .
 In 1980 Ronald Reagan, one of the harshest critics of detente, was elected U.S. president . In 1980 Reagan was elected United States president .
 He committed his country to rolling back the ‘evil empire’, as he described the Soviet Union . He began the largest peacetime military build-up in the history of the U.S.
 Reagan gambled that they could bankrupt the Soviet Union without causing all-out war and without damaging the U.S. economy . Reagan and his advisers gambled .
 The USSR devoted a far larger proportion of its economy to military expenditure than did the USA . The USSR found it impossible to match the advanced technology of its rival .
 By 1989 Mikhail Gorbachev recognized that drastic changes were needed in order to reduce international tension and expand the Soviet economy . By 1989 Soviet president Mikhail Gorgachev had decided to make drastic changes to the economy .
 Gorbachev’s liberalization led ultimately to the break-up of the Soviet Union in December 1991 . The U.S. lost its major adversary and the Gold War came to an end .
 As the leading superpower, the USA realized that its pre-war isolationist policy was no longer tenable, and that it had a major role to play in the reconstruction of Europe and in the encouragement of democratic regimes . damaging repercussions for United States international relations .
 The most extreme example of U.S. intervention was the Vietnam War . Vietnam War was the most extreme instance of intervention by the United States .
 President Kennedy committed United States ground troops to Vietnam in the early 1960s in an effort to ‘save’ Vietnam and its neighbouring countries from communism . But even with more than 500,000 troops fighting in Vietnam the United States government could not “save” a people who
 60,000 U.S. military personnel and two million Vietnamese lost their lives during the war . Millions more Vietnamese were left wounded, orphaned, and homeless .
 The United States strengthened trade with its American neighbours during the second half of the 20th century . The U.S. looked westwards to the rapidly growing economies of Southeast Asia and East Asia .
 In the 1990s, U.S. economic recovery encouraged the nation to play a leading role in the push towards more open global trading markets . In the 90s, the United States played a key role in pushing for more open trading .
 A third aircraft destroyed part of the Pentagon in Virginia, and a fourth jet crashed in Pennsylvania . A third plane crashed in Virginia and Pennsylvania .
 The United States produced evidence linking the attacks with Osama bin Laden, a Saudi dissident based in Afghanistan and leader of al-Qaeda, a loose network of terrorist groups . The U.S. government says the attacks were linked to bin Laden .
 President George W Bush launched air strikes against Afghanistan on 8 October 2001 . The Taliban government had refused to hand over Osama bin Laden .
 In December 2001, Afghan opposition forces, backed by U.S. and British special forces, overthrew the Taliban regime . The Taliban regime was overthrown in December 2001 and an interim government took office . Afghanistan's first government was formed by opposition forces .
 US-led invasion of Iraq was launched on 20 March 2003 . As part of this war, Iraq was invaded by the US in 2003 .
 The regime of Saddam Hussein collapsed within three weeks and the invaders became an occupying force . The invaders became the occupying force. Saddam Hussein's regime collapsed within 3 weeks .
 This was still in place when a democratically elected Iraqi government was formed in 2005 . The Iraqi government is now in full control of the country's constitution .
 Both the Organization of American States and the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation Organization proclaimed their intention of establishing free trade between their member states, in 2005 and 2020 respectively .
 The towers collapsed, killing over 3,250 people, a higher number of fatalities than at Pearl Harbor in 1941 . Over 3,000 people were killed in the collapse of the towers .
 Despite the Strategic Arms limitation talks, the destructive capacity of the two superpowers continued to grow . The Strategic Arms Reduction Talks opened in 1982, but ended in 1982 .
 In June 1950 North Korean troops advanced across the 38th parallel in a bid to unify the country . North Korea was invaded by the Korean peninsula in an attempt to unite the peninsula .
 United Nations troops landed in southeast of the country and at Inchon, behind North Korean lines . They had nearly gained control of the entire peninsula when U.N. troops landed .
 The UN troops advanced almost to the border with China, which reacted to this apparent threat to its territory and launched an attack in support of the North Koreans . China reacted to the apparent threat, launching an attack on the UN troops .
 By June 1951 UN troops had driven the Chinese and North Koreans back to a line north of the 38th parallel . For the next two months the UN troops were on the defensive .
 Protracted negotiations followed, with a truce eventually being signed in July 1953 . Protracted talks followed .
 T he Gold War was an ideological, political and diplomatic conflict in the years 1947-91 . The U.S. and its allies fought against the communist bloc led by the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union led the Soviet bloc .
 It had a detrimental effect on international relations in this period . Characterized by extreme tension and hostility, it was a period of extreme tension .
 At the Yalta Conference in February 1945 the United States, the Soviet Union and Britain had agreed that free elections would be held throughout Eastern Europe . The U.S. and Britain agreed to hold elections in Eastern Europe at the conference .
 Stalin intended to fill the political vacuum in Eastern Europe with communist governments loyal to Moscow . It soon became apparent, however, that the Soviet Union under Stalin intended instead of filling the political void . The Soviet Union intended instead to fill it with communist leaders loyal to Russia .
 The ‘Iron Curtain’, dividing communist regimes from the rest of Europe, had fully descended . ‘The Iron Curtain, dividing Communist regimes from rest of the world, has fully descended.’
 President Truman hoped that some form of co-operation with the USSR could continue . Despite these events in Europe, President Truman of the U.S. hoped that this would continue .
 In February 1947, the USA felt compelled to intervene in the Greek and Turkish governments . The UK was no longer able to provide economic and military support for the governments of Greece and Turkey .
 Not to do so might allow Greece, in particular, to fall to the communists, thus creating a threat to U.S. interests and national security . The United States should take action to prevent the communists' takeover of Greece .
 This was followed by the Marshall Plan, which provided $13. billion in economic aid to the war-tom countries of Europe . The Marshall Plan was the first aid to war-torn Europe in 1945 .
 It was hoped that this would combat the spread of communism across the continent . But it was only partially successful because the states in Eastern Europe refused to accept it .
 All these crises encouraged the creation of a string of Western military alliances to deter any further expansion of communist territory, beginning with the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 1949 .
 In the same year the USSR produced its first atomic bomb, and the Cold War took on a new character . In the year 1945, the U.S. and the Soviet Union produced the first atomic bombs .
 The USSR, knowing that it could match NATO in nuclear capacity, gained in confidence . From the point of view of the NATO countries, the tension was increased . The USSR gained confidence in knowing that NATO could match its nuclear capacity .
 In 1955 it established with other Eastern European countries a military alliance known as the Warsaw Pact . The Warsaw Pact was formed from Eastern European nations in 1955 .
 Despite the huge arsenal of nuclear weapons stockpiled by both sides, none was ever used in warfare . Despite, or because of, the huge arsenals, neither side ever used a nuclear weapon .
 Cold War never resulted in actual combat between U.S. and Soviet troops . The risk of nuclear weapons becoming involved being involved being far too high .
 It took on the form of an arms race and later a space race and the provision of economic aid and military equipment to other countries in order to gain political influence and thus strategic advantage .
 In some cases both sides intervened to defend their own ideology, and in a few cases one of them sent in troops . Both sides intervened in some cases to defend themselves .
 The discovery by the USA of Soviet missiles being assembled on communist-led Cuba, within easy range of the U.S. mainland, led to the gravest crisis of the Cold War . The discovery of the Soviet missiles in Cuba led to an immediate crisis .
 Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles from the Soviet Union . The tension eased only when the Soviet leader agreed to pull the missiles .
 Over the next 20 years both superpowers attempted to ease tensions and “thaw” the Cold War . The thawing of the war began in the 1950s and '60s .
 The resulting "detente" produced summit meetings and agreements to reduce nuclear arsenals . The resulting “detente” produced superpower summit meetings .
 In 1979 detente was abruptly ended when the USSR invaded Afghanistan, producing a new period of tension and hostility between the superpowers, and a fresh arms race . In 1979, the US and the Soviet Union began a new arms race in Afghanistan .
 He also began a process of internal reform in the USSR itself . He relaxed the Soviet grip on Eastern Europe .
 With the demise of the USSR and the formal dissolution of the Warsaw Pact in 1991, the Cold War came to an end . The Cold War ended in 1991 after the Soviet Union was formally dissolved in 1991 .
 A U.S. naval blockade, and a tense period during which nuclear war appeared likely, eventually resulted in the USSR agreeing to dismantle the nuclear bases . The USSR, under Khrushchev, agreed to dismantle nuclear bases in the 1960s .
 The Cold War was a period of political and economic confrontation between the two superpowers and their allies . A Cold War period of economic and political confrontation began in the 1950s .
 The area of highest tension was along the “Iron Curtain* that divided Western from Eastern Europe . The two sides' opposition to each other was ployed oat in conflicts some of a military nature all over the world .
 Japan was the only country to expand its empire during the inter-wor period . Japan moved into Manchuria in 1931 as a prelude to its lull-scole assault on China .
 The wars corrosive effects on colonialism were initially seen most clearly in Asia . The wars were first seen in Asia, where they were seen as a result of colonialism .
 Some colonies, such as Malaya and French Indochina, experienced Invasion and occupation bv Japanese forces, unleashing anti-colonial nationalism which could not be reversed after the war . Some colonies experienced invasion and occupation .
 African colonies became vital sources of military manpower and raw materials for the Allied effort . The African colonies were vital military manpower, raw materials and economic and social change .
 Colonial governments were forced to depart from their traditional approach of working through local political rulers . Colonial governments adopted a more interventionist approach to dealing with local rulers in the 1930s .
 This laid them open to criticism of wartime restrictions, food shortages and other hardships that often escalated into early forms of political protest . This led to local criticism of war restrictions and food shortages at the time .
 Although the war weakened most of the colonial powers, it also increased their desire to utilize colonial resources to assist their own economic recovery after the war . Paradoxically, although most colonial powers were weakened by the war, they were keen to use colonial resources for their economic recovery .
 The colonial powers sometimes used force in the face of growing local resistance to their rule . The French and Dutch attempted to re-establish control of Indochina and Indonesia respectively . Britain's ultimately successful campaign to defeat a communist insurrection in Malaya .
 Much of sub-Saharan Africa became Independent between 1956 and 1962 . The inevitability of independence is seen as a sign of progress .
 Part 5 majority rule in East and Central Africa, and Zimbabwe’s legal independence was delayed until 1980 . Part 5 minority rule in Zimbabwe was followed by majority rule .
 By the 1970s only the Portuguese dictatorship seemed determined to retain its African colonies . The Portuguese dictatorship was fighting a series of protracted wars against guerrilla movements . Only the Portuguese government was able to keep its colonies .
 The financial and human cost to Portugal was enormous, provoking a military coup and revolution in 1974 . The new government committed to rapid decolonization. The new Portuguese government was committed to decolonizing .
 Both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had traditionally been hostile to European colonial rule . The Soviet Union put pressure on their wartime allies, Britain and France, to commit to reform .
 In the immediate post-war period the colonial powers attempted to raise the living standards of the indigenous peoples in their colonies, hoping thus to appease both local feeling within the colonies and the international community .
 The U.N. became an important forum for criticism of colonialism . The United Nations is responsible for the territories mandated by the League of Nations .
 An important factor by the early 1960s was the desire to avoid costly, and probably unwinnable, wars against colonial nationalist movements .
 The long and bloody Algerian War demonstrated the perils of opposing demands for independence . France lost control of Algeria after the war .
 Such conflicts risked escalating the Cold War if the communist bloc offered support to the forces fighting for independence . Furthermore, such conflicts could also risk escalating the conflict with the Soviet Union .
 By the late 1950s economic integration in Western Europe was giving rise to serious doubts about the likely returns from large-scale colonial investment . Western European integration in the 1950s gave rise to doubts about colonial investment in Africa .
 As the French demonstrated, it was possible to decolonize while preserving many of the advantages, commercial and otherwise of formal colonial rule .
 A major consideration influencing British and French policymakers was the hope that their respective colonies would opt after independence to join the Commonwealth of Nations or the French Community . The French Community was a major consideration .
 Martinique cl | LW3V&mQ; M f$Aeo l com RICA PANAMA “i UVJU A/uoa j A5CXJ1. M*""**™* • JPQ^JGAjfTS 4
 France has maintained close economic, diplomatic and military links with many of its former possessions . Despite the effective collapse of the French Community in 1960, France maintains close economic and military ties with many former possessions.
 Decolonization posed the question of whether small island states could achieve viable independent nationhood . Small island states, particularly those in the Caribbean and the Pacific, could become viable independent nations . The question was posed by Decolonisation of Decolonized nations .
 One solution was to group small territories together into larger political units . Small territories were divided into smaller political units in order to form larger territorial units .
 The Federation of the West Indies was formed in 1958 after many years of negotiation . British Guiana and British Honduras opted not to join .
 When Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago gained separate independence in 1962 the Federation was dissolved . However, when its larger, more prosperous members, Jamaica and T.T.A. became independent, it was dissolved in 1962 .
 Britain wound down its overseas defence commitments in the late 1960s and early 1970s . Other island territories, such as Gibraltar, had originally acquired for their strategic value .
 The remaining European dependency is mostly small territories, often islands . The remaining EU territories are mostly small islands .
 In some cases, notably the Falkland Islands/Malvinas and Gibraltar, the issue of sovereignty remains unresolved . Gibraltar is one of the most disputed territories in the world .
 In the case of Hong Kong and Macau, the return of sovereignty to China was agreed through negotiated settlements . The return of China's sovereignty to Hong Kong was agreed in negotiations . Hong Kong is one of the largest economies in the world .
 Some small islands, especially in the Caribbean and Pacific, have opted for a limited form of independence . Others, including many in French Polynesia, have rejected offers of independence from colonial powers .
 Attempts to form an economic and political union, known as the Federation of the West Indies, failed . The larger ex-colonies opted out, leaving islands such as Montserrat to be administered as British dependency .
 All the ex-British colonies in the Caribbean opted to join the Commonwealth of Nations on achieving their independence .
 The expansion of the British Commonwealth (the Commonwealth of Nations) in 1947 to include India and Pakistan enabled the organization to evolve into a multi-ethnic grouping . Nearly all Britain's former colonies decided to join .
 South Africa left the Commonwealth in the face of condemnation of its policy of apartheid, but rejoined in 1994 . South Africa's apartheid policy was condemned by the Commonwealth for decades .
 Pakistan left in 1972 in protest at the admission of Bangladesh to the Commonwealth, but rejoined in 1989 . Pakistan left the Commonwealth in 1972, but returned to the UK in 1994 .
 Cameroon and Mozambique were the first countries not previously British colonies to be admitted to the UK in 1997 .
 Congress Parly won political control in provinces across the country in 1937 . The Congress won control of the country's provinces in the 1937 elections .
 Hwl by ihe end of the cenlury ihe population was increasing by 25 per ceni every ten years . Ils growth rate also accelerated, so Hwl was able to keep population alive .
 Hindus info India and Muslims into Pakistan D uring the 1920s and 1930s a struggle developed between Britain and India . Britain determined to maintain control over its empire in India .
 Political reforms in 1919, which were ostensibly a step towards eventual self-government, gave elected Indians limited responsibility in provincial government . However, they failed to satisfy nationalists .
 Indian protests centred on the campaigns of non-violent civil disobedience organized by the nationalist leader, Mohandas Gandhi, seeking Indian self-rule . Gandhi was the leader of the Indian National Council of India . The protests were led by Gandhi, who died in 1915 .
 Britain’s response was to combine repression (involving the detention of nationalist leaders among them Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru) with constitutional reforms .
 Provincial governments gave substantial power to autonomous provincial governments, while keeping overall control in British hands . The British government gave substantial powers to autonomous provinces .
 In India Britain suspended talk of constitutional change until after the war . Congress ministers resigned in protest at India’s involvement in the war without prior consultation .
 The cost of mobilizing India’s economy to support the war effort was high, and was paid for by the victims of the Bengal famine of 1943 . Over one million people died in Bengal famine in which over 1 million people were killed .
 In 1942, faced by a possible Japanese invasion, Britain offered India independence after the war, in return for its wartime support . India became independent in 1945 after independence from India .
 Congress replied with the massive ‘Quit India’ protest campaign, which resulted in its leaders being imprisoned until 1945 . Congress leaders were imprisoned until the end of the campaign .
 By 1945 Britain was lacking the will or the resources to rule by force, it sought to accelerate India’s independence .
 Britain hoped to maintain Indian unity through a federal structure . Congress insisted on a strong, centralized government, while Muslim League demanded greater provincial autonomy .
 Congress agreed to the partition of India, with the creation of a separate Pakistan from the mainly Muslim western provinces and Bengal . Congress agreed in the face of violence between the Hindu and Muslim communities . Congress also agreed to separate Pakistan and India .
 In August 1947 India and Pakistan became independent . Millions of Hindu and Muslim refugees sought safety in the two new states . Hindus and Muslims sought refuge in the newly independent states .
 At least one million people died in attacks and reprisal killings carried out by one or other of the opposing religious groups . At least 1 million people were killed in attacks or reprisal attacks .
 Since independence India has remained the world’s largest democracy . India is now the world's largest democracy.
 During the premiership of Nehru , his government introduced five-year plans, and controlled foreign and private enterprise, in an effort to increase agricultural and industrial production .
 Attempts were made to attack poverty and social underprivilege . Measures to emancipate women and the lower castes seen as challenging traditional Hindu values .
 Her attempts to tackle mass poverty and encourage birth control alienated conservative opinion . Her attempt to address mass poverty has been met with criticism .
 She was found guilty of electoral corruption in 1975 and declared a state of emergency in 1975 . She was also found guilty in 1975 of election corruption and declared an emergency .
 Growing Sikh separatism led to Mrs Gandhi’s assassination by Sikh extremists in 1984 . Sikh extremists assassinated Mrs Gandhi in 1984 in the name of Sikh extremists .
 Tensions also emerged between the central government and India’s Naga, Tamil and Muslim communities . Tensions have also been raised between the Naga and Tamil communities .
 The country laced poverty and political division, aggravated by West Pakistan’s attempts to assert its dominance over East Pakistan . The country has been plagued by political and economic problems .
 Pakistan aligned itself with the Western nations . Whereas india was a leading force in the non-aligned movement, Pakistan aligns itself .
 Pakistan’s army, which first seized power in 1958, often intervened in polities . While the Indian army remained non-political, Pakistan's army has intervened in politics .
 During the 1960s the economic gap between West and East Pakistan widened . The gap between East Pakistan and West widened . During the 60s the gap between the two countries widened .
 In East Pakistan separatism developed under Sheikh Mujib-urRahman, whose Awami League triumphed in the 1970 elections .
 When West Pakistan sent troops to restore order in 1971, civil war broke out and India intervened . India intervened on MujilVs behalf of West Pakistan .
 Pakistan defeated and independent Bangladesh was created in January 1972 . Pakistan was defeated and an independent Bangladesh became Bangladesh in 1972 .
 Political instability and military interventions have since added to Bangladesh’s problems of mass poverty . Continuing political instability has also added to the problems of the country's mass poverty, say experts .
 Zulfikar AH Bhutto’s modernization programme in the early 1970s alienated many in Pakistan . He was ousted in a military coup led by General Zia-ul-Haq who sought to create a more Islamic state .
 Through subsequent periods of military rule and democracy, the country faced problems of Islamic fundamentalism and separatism . The country faced the problems of the past two decades .
 The British colony of Ceylon contained a large Hindu Tamil minority . The majority Buddhist Sinhalese population was a Hindu minority . Sri Lanka is a Buddhist country .
 When it became independent iti 1948 government attempts to make Sinhalese the official language alienated the Tamil minority . Tamil minority, who campaigned for autonomy, fought for autonomy .
 Sirimavavo Bandaranaike became the world’s first woman prime minister in 1960 . She was Sri Lanka's first prime minister .
 She changed the country’s name to Sri Lanka in 1972 and pursued radical socialist policies . Sri Lanka is now a member of Sri Lanka .
 Junius Jayawardene, reversed this trend and tried to appease the Tamil community . He tried to reverse this trend .
 In 1983 longstanding ethnic tensions erupted into a prolonged civil war which ended in 1987 . Indian military intervention in 1987 failed to end the conflict .
 Relations between Tndia and Pakistan were soured by their rival claims to Jammu and Kashmir . Relations between the two countries soured due to rival claims over Kashmir . Pakistan and India are still at odds with each other .
 Kashmir initially remained independent from India and Pakistan, from which Kashmir remained independent . The new Pakistan government sent troops to lay claim to the predominantly Muslim state . Kashmir is a predominantly Muslim Muslim state in Kashmir .
 The Hindu maharaja, Sir I lari Singh, acceded the state to India, who sent troops in his support, forcing the Pakistanis into a partial withdrawal . The United Nations intervened and ruled in 1949 that a plebiscite should take place .
 Violent protests in Kashmir for greater autonomy have persisted since the 1980s . In 1965 serious lighting between Tndia and Pakistan culminated in a Soviet-arranged truce, and in 1972 each country accepted that the dispute should be solved bilaterally . Violent protests have continued since the 80s,
 Territorial disputes between India and China escalated after China absorbed Tibet in 1959 . Tibet is one of the world's most populous regions .
 In October 1962 China invaded india in Arunachal Pradesh, forcing Indian troops to retreat before a ceasefire was arranged . China invaded India in October 1962, forcing India to retreat from the border .
 Regional tensions have led India and Pakistan to maintain large armies and develop nuclear weapons . Both countries have developed nuclear weapons in response to tensions .
 In 2002 there was a threat of war between the two countries over Kashmir . In 2002, the two nations threatened to go to war in Kashmir .
 The dynastic tradition in South Asian politics has lad to several woman holding positions af power . People demanding autonomy in Sri Lanka are demanding autonomy .
 She served n Further term during die 1970s and in 1991 was appointed far a third by her daughter Chandriko Kumarntunga, who was then serving president .
 Border disputes occurred between India and Chine, and between Bhutan and China . Elsewhere, border disputes hove occurred between China and India .
 In 1971 fast Pakistan broke away horn West Pakistan la form the independent stale of Bunglndesh . In 1971, West Pakistan formed an independent state . Pakistan and India have experienced far more autonomy from people within their harden .
 The subcontinent's mast serious separatist activity has been that of the Tamils in Sri Lanka . An estimated 65,000 people were killed in a 2Q year civil war before a ceasefire in 2002 .
 The Federation of Malaysia was formed in 1963 but Singapore, an original member, left in 1965 . Singapore is one of the original original members of the Federation . Singapore was one of Malaysia's original members .
 Indonesia, formed in 1949, has occupied East Timor since 1975 . The Republic of Indonesia has occupied the island nation since then . It is also occupied by the Republic of Timor, which was formed from 1949 .
 Thailand was the only country in Southeast Asia not under Western colonial administration . Anti-colonial movements had been established in most parts of the region, even if in rudimentary form .
 At one extreme was the peaceful transfer of power in the Philippines . The Philippines had become a colony of the United States at the end of the Spanish-American War .
 The United States, with a strong anti-colonial tradition, moved rapidly to transfer political and administrative powers to Filipinos . The U.S. was uncomfortable with its new responsibilities and moved rapidly .
 In 1935 it established the Philippine Commonwealth, granting the Filipino government control of internal affairs, and promising full independence on 4 July 1946 . In 1946 it promised full independence from the Philippines .
 To a large degree, the process of decolonization was driven by the colonial power itself, says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "Decolonization is driven by a large part of the process"
 Anticolonial agitation was suppressed by colonial administrations in the 1920s and 1930s . At the other extreme was the turbulent situation in French Indochina and the Dutch East Indies .
 The fiercely anti-Western sentiments expressed by the Japanese, and their effective destruction of the myth of white supremacy, influenced the political aspirations of the indigenous populations of the region .
 Following the Japanese surrender in August 1945, the Dutch and French faced severe opposition to their attempts to re-establish control over their former colonies . Following the surrender of the Japanese, the French and Dutch faced .
 In the Dutch East Indies a fierce military and political battle was waged between the Dutch and the forces of the newly declared Republic of Indonesia until the end of 1949 . The United States acted through the United Nations to pressure the Dutch to withdraw .
 Burma achieved independence early in 1948, but was almost immediately riven by ethnic and political splits . Burma's independence was followed by ethnic, political splits in 1948 .
 In 1962 it became a military-led state in which all dissent was ruthlessly crushed . In 1962, the country became a state where dissent was brutally suppressed .
 British rule in Malaya came to an end by peaceful negotiation in 1957 . From 1948 to 1960 British and Commonwealth troops were involved in the suppression of a major communist rebellion .
 North Vietnam attempted to overthrow the southern regime and reunify the country . North Vietnam was overthrown by the South Vietnamese regime .
 The U.S. became militarily involved in the 1960s but was eventually defeated by the Vietcong's guerrilla tactics . The United States was anxious to prevent the spread of communism but was defeated .
 In French Indochina the anti-colonial struggle was to last much longer . The Vietnam War was the first major war in the region .
 French forces were defeated at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 . After a long, draining guerrilla war, the French forces lost their control of Vietnam .
 The Communists failed to secure a united Vietnam under their control at the Geneva Conference which opened in May 1954 . The Geneva Conference was held in Vietnam in 1954 .
 In the late 1950s communist North Vietnam began the armed struggle to overthrow the southern regime . The Ho Chi Minh Trail in reality a shifting complex of jungle routes into the South .
 The United States first committed ground troops to Vietnam in 1965 . Much of its military might took the form of mass bomber raids from bases in Thailand and aircraft-carriers .
 The offensive failed to dislodge the southern regime and its ally . However, despite some striking successes, the offensive was not successful .
 In 1970, in an attempt to protect its forces in the south, the United States launched an invasion into eastern Cambodia . The U.S. invaded eastern Cambodia with the aim of destroying the communist sanctuaries there .
 U.S. forces were withdrawn from Vietnam by the end of March 1973 . It was now clear that the United States could not defeat the Vietcong and, following strong domestic pressure, the U.N. troops were withdrawn .
 In April 1975 communist troops entered Saigon, the southern regime collapsed, and Vietnam was united under communist rule . Vietnam is now Vietnam's most populous country .
 The period since the mid-1960s has seen an extraordinary economic transformation in large parts of Southeast Asia . The post-colonial era has seen a huge transformation in the region since the 1960s .
 This was largely achieved through heavy investment by East Asian, European and American multinational companies, which took advantage of Southeast Asia’s low wage costs .
 High growth rates sustained over a number of decades, with a particularly rapid spurt in the late 1980s . High economic growth rates were sustained over several decades .
 The industrialization of Southeast Asia was mirrored by the rapid pace of urbanization in the region . Industrialization of the region has been mirrored by rapid urbanization .
 Cities expanded rapidly, with the result that a high proportion of the population now live in shanty towns surrounding prosperous commercial centres . Cities have expanded rapidly in the past, with a large proportion of population now living in towns surrounding the prosperous centres .
 Rapid economic growth created fortunes for Southeast Asia’s tycoons . Large urban middle class and those living in rural areas also benefited from the boom .
 Southeast Asia’s long boom was brought to a sudden halt in the middle of 1997 . Southeast Asia's long boom came to an end in 1997 after a decade of prosperity .
 Beginning with the Thai baht, many of the region’s major currencies came under intense speculative pressure and were forced to devalue . The region's major currencies have been devalued in recent years .
 In the wake of the financial meltdown unemployment soared and large sections of the population faced severe economic hardship . Unemployment soared in the aftermath of the meltdown .
 The causes of the crisis differed from economy to economy, but the overcommitment of largely unregulated banks, widespread corruption and unsustainable budget deficits by governments with over-ambitious spending plans .
 Riots in Indonesia in May led to the end of President Suharto’s 30-year period in power . A split in the dominant political party, coupled with popular protest against corruption, provoked a serious challenge to the prime minister, Mahathir bin Muhammad .
 Southeast Asia has tor centuries been a provider of raw materials to Western and Japanese manufacturers . A Southeast Asia region has been a source of raw material for decades . The region has become a major market for raw materials from Asia .
 Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand have also developed into producers of manufactured goods . They include electrical and electronic products . The Philippines, Malaysia and Indonesia are among the countries producing electrical and electronics .
 As their industrial sector has expanded so have their cities, people have flooded in from agricultural regions . They hope to find relatively well-paid employment in manufacturing and expanding service industries .
 Social and finantiol adjustments will be required in order to provide a decent standard of living for a forge population of pensioners . Social and financial adjustments will need to be made in order for a decent living .
 Allied {predominantly American] occupiers moved swiftly to incorporate democratic reforms into a revised constitution . The Allied {previously American} occupiers were moved swiftly .
 The emperor was retained as a ceremonial figure, but power was exercised by a legislature elected by universal suffrage . The emperor remained in power but was replaced by a state legislature .
 By the time the United States administration ended in 1952, Japan had been redefined as a bastion of anti-communism in Asia, and expenditure of around $3. billion by the U.S. military during the Korean War had stimulated the economy .
 As wealth accumulated, domestic demand became an increasingly important source of growth . Domestic demand has become an important part of the economy's growth .
 By the late 1960s it was apparent that unrestrained economic expansion had environmental costs . Outbreak of illnesses caused by industrial pollution such as ""Minamata Disease” and “Yokkaichi Asthma"" serious enough to attract international attention .
 Japan’s vulnerability to disruption in the supply of an energy source was exposed amid panic buying of daily essentials by the public, rapid inflation and the temporary cessation of growth .
 Energy-intensive heavy industries were obliged to raise their efficiency and clean up their effluents or move overseas . Japan felt the effect of competition from Korea and the other emerging industrial economies in East Asia .
 Japan enjoyed an extraordinary period of economic expansion in the 1990s . Small, fuel-efficient cars were suddenly in demand .
 Industrial production had recovered to pre-war levels by 1955, and during the 1960s average annual growth rates exceeded 10 per cent . Industrial production was recovered by the end of the war, but industrial production was still booming .
 Japan’s deficiencies in mineral resources were of little importance in an era when cheap raw materials could be acquired easily from overseas . Cheap raw materials were easily obtained from overseas from overseas.
 The U.S. offered a ready market for manufactured exports, made more competitive by an increasingly undervalued currency . It also provided access to Industrial expertise for Japanese technologists .
 The “family state"" of pre-war times was replaced by a “developmental state"", in which a stable political regime under the conservative Liberal Democrats allowed major industrial groupings to re-emerge under the guiding hand of an elite bureaucracy . Foreign policy focused overwhelmingly on
 Labour shortages, high land prices and pollution controls in large cilws, plus competilinn ham overseas, fuelled the relocation of industry within Japan . High land prices, pollution controls and competition overseas have fuelled relocation .
 In the 1960s Japanese manufacturing was dominated by heavy industries such as steel production and shipbuilding .
 By the 1970s, however, more profitable industries, including vehicle manufacturing, were increasingly important . By the 1980s, the car industry had become more profitable .
 In the 19fl0s new industries such as semiconductors and other electronic equipment, experienced a boom and continued to expand in the 1990s . The changing balance of industrial production exports responded quickly, until the threat of protective tariffs from countries in North America and Europe on cars exported from
 Industry shifted towards ‘knowledge-intensive’ sectors such as electronics . Japan established international standards and dominated world markets . Industry shifted to knowledge-intensive sectors .
 Growth did slow from the heady rates of the 1960s, but still averaged over 4 per cent per annum in 1974 to 1985 . Japan was able to weather the second oil crisis of 1978, when oil prices collapsed .
 As the 1980s progressed, relations with the U.S. became more problematic . Relations with the United States became more difficult as the country grew stronger .
 The cost to the United States of protecting Japan during the Cold War was high, while Japan grew ever richer on burgeoning trade surpluses . The U.S. helped protect Japan from a growing Cold War .
 The United States became sensitive to the effect of imports from Japan on job prospects at home . The U.S. became sensitive about the effect on the job prospects of those from Japan .
 It put restraints on trade in manufactured goods between the two countries . Pressure on Japan to open up its markets to U.S. farm produce such as rice .
 Japanese agriculture was by now heavily subsidized and plagued by inefficiencies linked to the small farms inherited from the land reforms of the 1940s .
 It attempted, unsuccessfully, to adapt to competition from imports by changing the crops that it produced . It attempted to adapt by changing crops that had to be changed .
 Plaza Agreement of 1985 sought to resolve global trade imbalances by expanding Japan’s domestic demand . Plaza Agreement was between the U.S., Japan, France, Germany and the United Kingdom .
 The rapid appreciation of the yen is expected to make Japanese products less competitive in international markets . It is also expected to boost imports to Japan .
 It was matched by a rapid expansion in Japan’s foreign aid . The aim of the aid was to support infrastructural improvements in neighbouring countries .
 This facilitated production of, and created additional demand for, Japanese products in these countries . This facilitated increased production of and increased demand .
 Japan became the centre of a regional manufacturing system tied together by trade flows of raw materials, components and manufactured goods . Japan is now the world's largest manufacturing hub .
 Tokyo was transformed into one of the world’s three great financial centres . Tokyo has been transformed into a financial hub in the world .
 Investments at home and overseas buoyed up by low interest rates and the willingness of banks to lend against property assets . Property assets soared in value as value of investments soared by value .
 This speculative ‘bubble economy’ finally burst in the early 1990s as land prices collapsed . Land prices collapsed, obliging the government to shore up the ailing banking sector .
 The banks’ problems were compounded by the subsequent economic crisis in Southeast Asia . Loans to finance new factories in Thailand, Indonesia and elsewhere turned sour . The banks' problems have been compounded by a decade of low-profit margins .
 Its politicians are attempting to relax bureaucratic control of domestic markets . Its politicians were attempting to continue the reform of its financial systems .
 Such changes were a necessary counterpart to the growing climate of openness in Japan’s trade and financial relations with the outside world. Such changes are necessary, says the government minister .
 Popular opposition to military participation in the Gulf War of 1991 indicated the mismatch between Japan’s status as a pre-eminent global economic power and its low political and military profile . North Korean missiles pose threat posed by North Korean missile threat .
 The occupation by Russia of the islands to the northeast of Japan also remained a sensitive issue at the end of the century . Russia occupied the islands in the early 1900s .
 The ""hollowing out"" of the Japanese economy saw Japanese direct investment in Asia increase tenfold between 1985 and 1990 . The increase in direct investment between Japan and Asia increased tenfold in the 1990s .
 Attempts to restrict the size of families were made during the 1970s . In 1979, a law was passed in 1979 limiting married couples to one child .
 Population continues to grow officially at around 1 per cent per year, although this takes no account ol a large, mobile, unregistered population, mainly in rural China .
 The country's urban population has grown steadily as a proportion uf the total, except fur the period of the Cultural RnvluFW , when it declined .
 At the lime of Moo's death in 1976 the maturity were clustered, os they hod been for centuries . In the rich agricultural regions, with around 20 per cent of the population in cities .
 The People's Republic of China was founded in 1949 following the defeat of the Japanese invaders and the unification of the country under a single government . The country was unified in 1949 after defeating Japanese invaders .
 The immediate priorities were to establish law and order, implement land reforms, balance the state budget, stabilize prices and nationalize industry . The state will also try to establish land reforms and stabilize prices .
 Chairman Mao Zedong began to introduce communist reforms in the mid-1950s onwards . Mao gained public support for these essentially nationalistic policies, from the mid 1950s onwards onwards .
 Initially, the communist programme was heavily influenced by the Soviet Union, with whom China had signed a pact in 1950 . China's communist programme has been heavily criticised by the Soviets .
 It involved wholesale rural and urban collectivization, with the assets of large property owners being taken over by the state . The state took over large property assets from property owners .
 Other radical social measures were passed, including giving women equal legal status with men in terms of marriage and employment .
 The main thrust of the programme was industrialization, formalized into a series of five-year plans . The programme was launched in 1970s and 1980s .
 The aim was to create an economy that did not depend on imports from capitalist countries . The policy was initially effective in changing China's economy from agriculture to heavy industry . It was initially successful in changing the economy from one based on agriculture .
 Mao rejected the Soviet model and developed a specifically Chinese communism based on peasant labour . In his second five-year plan, known as rhe ''Great Leap Forward’, he instructed collectives to build and run small-scale iron and steel foundries .
 The scheme also took labour away from the agricultural sector . However, not only did it prove impossible to produce metal of an acceptable standard, it also took away labour from agricultural workers .
 Production of food dropped as a consequence, leading to a nationwide famine that claimed tens of millions of lives . The plan also seriously backfired in the industrial sector, with production dropping by up to 50 per cent . The government forced the government to de-industrialize the economy .
 Chairman Mao launched his Cultural Revolution in 1966 in an attempt to revive his control over the party and society . Mao's main concern was to promote his ideology and increase his power . The Cultural Revolution led him into conflict with other members of his government .
 Millions of young people were joined by millions of people whose schools and universities had been closed . Millions of people were joining them in the wake of the earthquake .
 Industrial production was severely disrupted, and the economy brought near to bankruptcy during the ten-year process . The process was brought to a near-collapse during the decade .
 China allied itself with the Soviet Union after the revolution of 1949 . China also gave assistance to independence movements in Southeast Asia .
 North Korea provided troops to assist North Koreans in their efforts to unify their country in 1950 . It also aided the Vietnamese in their battle to expel the French from Indochina in the 1950s .
 From the early 1960s, China’s relations with the Soviet Union soured, mainly due to Khrushchev's repudiation of Stalin's policies . From the mid-1960s, however, China's relations with Russia soured .
 China also lost support among the neutral, newly independent countries of the developing world when it crushed anti-Chinese opposition in Tibet, and entered into a border dispute with India . At the same time, China also loses support among newly independent nations .
 In 1971 Mao, in an apparent reversal of policy, welcomed President Nixon’s initiative to normalize relations with the United States . The Cultural Revolution was a period of intense xenophobia, but in 1971 Mao welcomed Nixon's initiative .
 In October of that year the People’s Republic of China replaced Taiwan in the U.N. China .
 China after Mao Mao’s death in 1976 initiated a power struggle between the ‘Gang of Four’ and Deng Xiaoping . China after the death of Mao Mao's death in . 1976, China began its power struggle with the “Gang .
 China’s industrial output rose steadily during the 1980s, and increased dramatically during the 1990s by over 20 per cent each year . The country's industrial output increased steadily during that period .
 In the agricultural sector China made important gains through the reform of farming practices . China has made significant gains through reform of its farming practices.
 From 1978 onwards state ownership and planning were reduced, ‘the market’ was respected and nurtured, and property rights were gradually defined . Property rights have been gradually defined in the 1970s .
 Communes abolished and citizens permitted to run private businesses and engage in market activities . Communes were abolished . Citizens were allowed to run their own businesses and run private activities .
 Instead of attempting to make China self-sufficient, the new regime adopted an export-led growth strategy, copied from other newly industrialized countries . The new regime has been criticized for being too reliant on exports .
 As China became more open to Western economic principles and ideology during the 1980s, many people, in particular students, began also demanding modernization of the political system .
 Hu’s demotion and subsequent death triggered pro-democracy demonstrations in many major cities during April 1989 protests . Hu's demotion triggered protests in major cities in April 1989 .
 Throughout May demonstrators occupied the vast Tiananmen Square in Beijing, demanding Deng’s dismissal and political reform . Demonstrators demanded the dismissal of Deng and political reforms .
 Chinese government held back for several weeks . With the world’s press watching, the world's press watched, the Chinese government kept back .
 The army moved in to disperse the demonstrators overnight on 3-4 June . However, the army had to move in order to disperse demonstrators .
 Hundreds were killed and thousands were injured . Arrests, imprisonments and executions followed . Hundreds of thousands were killed .
 Later that year the Chinese government decided to privatize state-owned enterprises operating at a loss roughly 30 per cent of the state sector . The Chinese government later decided to sell some of its state-run enterprises .
 The trend towards a semi-capitalist society continues in uneasy contrast to the strict party control . With mounting unemployment from the collapse of the public sector, the trend towards semi-capitalism continues .
 The majority of industrial production in the 1980$ was to be found along the Yangtze River, used to transport raw materials and finished goods to internal and foreign markets .
 Communist China represents a vast potential market to the capitalist economies . Communist China is a huge potential market for the world's largest economies .
 Special Economic Zones, in which a free market economy (including foreign goods and capital) could function, were established by the Chinese government in the 1980s . They were established as an experiment .
 Foreign businesses have special access to the vast Chinese market . They were followed by ""open cities" - initially along the coast but later inland - where foreign businesses have access to China .
 The ease with which African countries were drawn into the Second World War highlighted their status as European possessions .
 North Africa became a major theatre of conflict, and many African soldiers served with the Allied armies . Many African soldiers were involved in North Africa's first war .
 African colonies were used as major sources of vital raw materials and foodstuffs . African colonies also used as sources of raw materials .
 Industrialization and urbanization increased markedly, as did the production of foodstuffs and cash crops by African cultivators . Industrialization also increased markedly .
 The refusal of the colonial powers to extend to Africa the democratic ideals for which they had fought in Europe sharpened Africans’ sense of the injustice of colonialism . In political terms, the refusal . to extend . to Africa's democratic ideals sharpened Africa’s sense of injustice of
 The independence granted to India in 1947 and other countries in Asia around this time encouraged African nationalists to press for similar political freedoms in their own continent . India's independence in 1947 encouraged by other countries around Asia around the time .
 The rise of an educated African elite took advantage of new economic opportunities and skill shortages in the colonial bureaucracy . The educated elite provided a social base for the developing anti-colonial consciousness .
 Britain and France relied on African raw materials, purchased at artificially depressed prices, to rebuild their shattered economies . A growing desire for independence was fuelled by the fact that in the years immediately after the war, British and French relied on Africa's raw materials .
 Between 1945 and 1951 Britain made a profit of £140 million on commodity transactions with its African colonies . Britain injected only £40 million in return via the Colonial Development and Welfare Acts .
 The speed with which the process of gaining independence swept through Africa was in many ways a mirror image of the hasty 19th-century partition of Africa among the colonial powers . The speed of Africa's gaining independence was a mirror-image of the 19th century partitioning of Africa .
 Libya gained independence in 1951 largely because the U.N. could not agree who should control the former Italian colony . Libya's independence was largely decided by the United Nations in 1951 . Libya is now one of the world's most impoverished countries .
 The vast British-controlled Sudan gained independence in 1956, as did the French colony of Tunisia . Sudan is one of several African nations to have gained independence from colonial Britain .
 colonial Africa, hastily drawn in the ""scramble for Africa 11 , continued into modern times as the boundaries of Africa 11 continued . With a lew exception (he boundaries of colonial Africa were hastily drawn) with exceptions .
 Sudan, Zaire and ihe Biafrart region of Nigeria all failed to establish new stales . Stales were won in southern Sudan and Zaire, Zinez and Nigeria .
 Somaliland Republic was loss successful al establishing independence . Somalililand Republic is a self-proclaimed Somalian Republic of Somalia . It was founded in 1991 .
 Western Sahara was occupied by Morocco after being granted independence by Spain in 1976 . Morocco was granted independence from Spain in 1975 . Western Sahara has been occupied by Spain since 1976 .
 The establishment of n democratic system wilh multi-party elections has la ken several decades, and a few hove yet to achievert . Far most stntes the establishment of the democratic system has yet to achieve .
 In ibe late 1980s and 1990s, support for democracy was reinforred by the collapse af communism in the Soviet Union . Pressure from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank la democratize as a condition af loan extensions .
 Part 5 f jr j* 3 South Africa under apartheid . Part 5: 200,000-1,000.000 South Africans .
 Violent protests, coupled with international pressure, eventually led to the abolition of apartheid and the release of Nelson Mandela, in 1990 .
 Protests in Bophuthatswana and KwaZulu Natal had threatened to disrupt them, but they passed off relatively peacefully . Protests were largely peaceful in the province, but were not disrupted by violence .
 Nelson Mandela was sworn in as President of South Africa in May 1994 . The African National Congress was victorious, taking 63 per cent of the vote . Nelson Mandela became President of the country in 1994 .
 Kvvame Nkrumah, that sparked off a wave of decolonization in sub-Saharan Africa, was born in Ghana . He sparked a wave that sparked the wave of decolonization in sub-Sahara Africa .
 Ghana provided a model of relatively peaceful transition to independence . In Algeria and Kenya protracted and bitter insurrection was waged by the National Liberation Front and the Mau Mau movement respectively .
 The Belgian Congo (Zaire, now Democratic Republic of Congo) in 1960 resulted in the attempted secession of the copper-rich southern region, giving rise to political instability and foreign interference that characterized the post-independence history .
 Not all African countries gained independence during the first wave of national liberation . Not all of the African nations gained independence from colonial powers .
 The Portuguese colonies of Angola and Mozambique finally won independence only after a coup d’etat in Lisbon in April 1974, led by General Spinola . Portuguese colonies won independence from Portugal in 1974 .
 The struggle in Guinea-Bissau (which had claimed its independence) persuaded Spinola that the Portuguese African empire could no longer be sustained .
 A bitter guerrilla war was also fought in Southern Rhodesia . A white colonial regime had proclaimed its own independence from Britain in 1965 .
 The upsurge of African nationalism engendered huge optimism and unrealistic expectations of rapid economic development . After independence, African nationalism also engendered unrealistic expectations .
 All too often, however, the new governing elites were illprepared for office, ambitious development plans went awry . Expectations of rapid industrialization were misplaced and political instability became endemic .
 During the Cold War competition for influence in Africa became an important proxy for global conflict . Former colonial powers could exert great economic power .
 Foreign aid was often provided in the form of military training and weaponry, rather than as a stimulus to economic development . Foreign aid is often provided to support military training rather than economic development in the country .
 When the Ghanaian president Nkrumah was deposed in a coup in 1966, much of the early optimism for independent Africa began to wane .
 The civil war that broke out when Biafra sought to secede from Nigeria in 1967 highlighted the failure of nationalism to supersede ethnic divisions .
 Many African countries have made solid economic and social progress since independence . Schools and health facilities have been extended in Africa since independence from Africa .
 Following independence, countries such as Ghana and Mozambique adopted the rhetoric of socialist transformation . Others, such as Kenya and the Ivory Coast, proclaimed the benefits of capitalism . Tanzania sought to disengage itself from the world economy and concentrate on autonomous development .
 Many African countries made considerable economic progress in the 1950s and 1960s as a result of relatively high commodity prices . But none of these approaches proved particularly successful in the long run .
 In Nigeria the exploitation of oil reserves provided spectacular wealth for its political elite . In Nigeria, exploitation of the oil reserves provides spectacular wealth . The country's political elite has benefited from its oil wealth .
 Falling commodity prices and increased interest rates severely affected those economies that had been encouraged to borrow on international markets . Falling commodity price and interest rates also affected those countries that had had been able to borrow from international markets.
 By the mid-1980s some, such as Zambia, were so stricken by debt that they had no option but to accept ‘structural adjustment programmes’ proposed by the International Monetary Fund .
 Large parts of Africa experienced economic stagnation during the 1980s . As a result of this, large parts of the continent was left in economic stagnation .
 In the early 1990s optimism replaced the euphoria of the independence era and the gloom of the 1980s . Several civil wars ended and democratic elections were held across the continent .
 As the decade wore on, however, such optimism appeared ill-founded as bitter ethnic and religious disputes and civil wars broke out . The prospect of democracy and development receded in several key states .
 A wave of popular support brought Nelson Mandela to power in the 1994 elections . Nelson Mandela was elected president of South Africa in 1994 .
 Expectations of rapid improvements in living conditions for the black majority population have proved somewhat over-optimistic . Many material and social advances have been made, but expectations have proved too high .
 In most coun trios, however, with the notable exception of Brazil, row moieriofs continue to be the morn exports . Latin America's consistent failure to increase its mmndnetoring output is seen as a problem .
 Until the mid-1960s, most countries were committed to state-led Industrialization . The aim was to achieve virtual self-sufficiency in both manufacturing and heavy industry .
 Economic nationalism was a dominant ideology, with governments seeking to maximize their control over the production of raw materials . Governments sought to maximize control of their control of the production .
 neo-liberal orthodoxy swept the region in the 1980s, with most governments implementing policies of deregulation, privatization, foreign investment and fiscal reform . Most governments implemented policies of privatization and foreign investment .
 By the mid-1960s govemment-led industrialization had failed to generate the anticipated number of jobs, but had also not progressed much beyond light Industry and proved unable to compete .
 Latin American m f countries to import more in the short term in order to establish their industries, leading to balance of payments difficulties . This was partly the result of weaknesses within tite strategy itself .
 The politicization of economic decision-making by Latin American states also had a detrimental effect on industrialization policies . Politicians in Latin America have been politicized in economic decision making .
 Some Latin American countries did become more industrialized during the 1950s and 1960s but were still far more dependent on the production of raw materials (mop /} than had been anticipated .
 The failure of the industrialization model was one factor contributing to the debt crises that hit Latin America in the early 1980s . The major cause was the disintegration, during the 1960s, of the system of international financial regulation that had been in place since 1944 .
 With economic depression and inflation in the developed economies, these loans were effectively set at very low, or even negative, interest rates . With inflation and low interest rates in developed economies these loans could be set at low or negative interest rates, the loans are effectively set low or low .
 When U.S. interest rates rose dramatically in the early 1980s, Latin American countries found themselves unable to service their debts . Latin American nations were unable to pay their debts in the 1980s .
 Most debtor countries were obliged to sign stabilization agreements with the IMF as a prerequisite to rescheduling of their debts . As bankers hastened to call on the services of the International Monetary' Fund , most debtor countries are obliged .
 The aim of these agreements was to cut spending and increase exports, thereby maximizing revenue to make interest payments . The aim was to reduce the deficit by cutting spending and increasing exports .
 The 1980s are referred to as “the lost decade lf of Latin American development’s development; economies contracted and there was a huge net transfer of capital out of the region . In the 1990s capital investment returned to Latin America, and it is now accepted that much
 Latin America could continue to be burdened by interest payments well into the 21st century . However, Latin America will continue to pay interest payments through the next century .
 Politically, this period saw the introduction of full suffrage throughout the region . Women granted the vote hy the mid-1950s in all Latin American countries . Literacy qualifications gradually dropped, although not until as late as 1989 in Brazil .
 For much of the period the democratic process was compromised at best, and completely suspended at worst . However, for many of the time the democratic processes were compromised . The democratic process has been compromised, and suspended, at the worst .
 Most countries were governed by populist regimes in the 1940s and 1950s . They tended to use dictatorial methods once in power . Argentina's Juan Domingo Perdn was the classic example .
 populism generated a level of political activity among the masses which alarmed those in the property-owning classes to such an extent that most were prepared to support military coups in the 1960s and 1970s .
 USA kinds counter Tfidulrorwry mavemenl (1986s I 6 Covert intervention by USA to defeat loft wing guerrillas 9 U.S. invasion to restore stable government (19B3) 10 United States invasion to arrest President Noriega an
 Even adjacent countries such as Argentina, Bolivia and Paraguay have markedly different erhnk proportions . Even adjacent nations such as Paraguay and Argentina have different proportions .
 In mony parts ol the region die broad lean 'Latin' appears singularly inappropriate . Development economies learned either in the USA itself or at national military training schools based on the United States model .
 The military leaders argued that only they were capable of bringing about national development . The democratic process would have to he suspended until the country was “ready* for electoral polities.”
 The repression for which these regimes became internationally condemned was directed initially at the Left, but gradually acquired a random nature . The repression was designed to inhibit all political activity, even among moderates, even though they were moderates .
 A process of redemocratlatlzation began In Latin America in 1980, and by 1990 there were elected governments in every country of the region apart from Cuba .
 Most Latin American countries are still some distance away from being fully consolidated liberal democracies . Civil rights, respect for civil rights, freedom of the press and broadly representative political parties are still far away from a fully consolidated democracy .
 The process of resisting authoritarianism stimulated a wide range of grassroots organizations concerned with, for example, human rights, womens issues and neighbourhood self-help, many of which are reluctant to be recruited by formal political parties .
 The question of ethnic identities also assumed an increasing significance, particularly in 1992, the quincenteunlal of the European ""conquest" or ""discovery"" or ""encounter’ 1 with the Americas .
 There is still a potentially dangerous gap between the concerns of the people and of the government in many Latin American countries . The gap is still being bridged between people and government in Latin America countries .
 Cuban revolutionary movement readied in the overthrow of the Batista on 1 January 19S9 and the installation ol Castro as (Meskterf. A Between 1956 and 1958 Fpdel Cinlrokd a i evolutionary movement m Cuba that readied .
 The resultant oil boom facilitated the rapid modernization of the producer states . The resulting oil boom has led to rapid modernization in the region .
 It also contributed to the economies of the surrounding countries, partly through the wages paid to immigrant workers in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states . The oil-rich countries also provided politically motivated development aid .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries attempts to ensure a minimum price for crude oil by controlling supplies . Its most powerful members are in the Middle East, which has a large stake in oil prices .
 D uring the Second World War calls for independence intensified from the territories in the Middle East held as mandates by the French and British .
 Britain relinquished its mandate of Jordan, but was left with the growing problem of its mandate in Palestine . In the same year the British government relinquished control of Jordan .
 The issue of whether a Jewish State should be established in Palestine became a focal point of international politics . The new State of Israel was established in 1948 .
 The mass influx of refugees from Nazi-occupied territories and the suggestion by the United Nations that Palestine be divided into Arab and Jewish states, with Jerusalem as an international zone, exacerbated tensions between the growing Jewish immigrant community and the Arab inhabitants of the region .
 A civil war between Arabs and Jews from November 1947 escalated into an international war between Israel and the Arab countries of Egypt, Syria and Iraq . The war ended in an Arab defeat and armistice agreements by July 1949 . Israel was declared a state on 14 May 1948 after the British withdrawal
 More than 700,000 Palestinians fled to refugee camps in the West Bank and East Jerusalem . The remaining Arab parts of Palestine, annexed by Jordan in 1950, Gaza (ocupied by Egypt)
 Sinai, captured by Israel in 1967, returned to Egypt under a peace treaty in March 1979 . Sinai was captured by Egypt in 1967 and returned under peace treaty with Israel in 1979 .
 In 1964 the Palestine Liberation Organization began a guerrilla war against Israel . In 1987 a Palestinian Intifada increased pressure on Israel to negotiate with the government .
 Oslo Agreement led to limited self-rule for the Palestinians in parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip vacated by Israeli forces . The Oslo Agreement was signed by Israel and the Palestinians .
 Peace talks stalled over the status of the city of Jerusalem, terrorist attacks on Israel, and continued building of Jewish settlements in the occupied territories . Peace talks also stalled over status of Jerusalem and terrorist attacks .
 In 2000, after the breakdown of peace negotiations, a second Intifada broke out . The cycle of violence continued and violence continued until 2000 .
 In January 2005 a new president of the Palestinian Authority was elected on a platform of renewing the peace process . However, in January 2005, a new Palestinian Authority president was elected .
 Arab-Israeli conflict spilled into neighbouring Lebanon, Lebanon . A delicate balance of power existed between Maronite Christians and Shi’ite and Sunni Muslims .
 Fighting only ended in 1991, with victory for the Muslims . Agreement of Ta’if prepared the ground for peace, but fighting continued until 1991 .
 In 2000, Israeli troops withdrew from southern Lebanon, and Syria-backed Hizbollah forces moved in . Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, and Syrian-backed forces moved into southern Lebanon .
 Defeat by Israel in 1949 served as a catalyst for the emergence of army-led, nationalist, secular regimes that advocated socialist reforms . Egypt, Syria and Iraq were the first countries to see socialist reforms to improve living conditions .
 Gamal Abdel Nasser advocated non-alignment with the Soviet Union as a way of curtailing the influence of Western powers in the Middle East . Nasser of Egypt became the champion of Arab nationalism, advocating non-aligned Arab nationalism .
 In 1956 Nasser’s nationalization of the Suez Canal led to a failed attempt by Israeli, British and French troops to gain control of this vital sea-route . In 1956, Israeli, French and Israeli troops attempted to seize control of the canal .
 Egypt’s anti-Western approach was opposed by Saudi Arabia, Israel and Iran . Saudi Arabia and Iran saw Egypt's growing power as a threat to the West . Egypt has been in touch with the West since 1979 .
 Tensions arising from widening social rifts in many oil-rich states resulted in the emergence of “political Islam” ‘Political Islam’ combined radical religious teaching of Islam with the desire for social and political change .
 The Iranian revolution of 1979 under Ayatollah Khomeini, with its specifically Shi’ite character, encouraged other Islamic opposition movements . The 1979 revolution was the first of its kind in Iran and encouraged other opposition groups .
 Islamic groups fought the Soviet intervention of 1979 before engaging in a civil war which resulted in the Taliban establishing a fundamentalist government in 1997 . Islamic groups in Afghanistan fought against Soviet intervention in 1979 .
 In December 2001, opposition forces, backed by U.S. and British special forces overthrew the Taliban, and formed an interim government . The Taliban was overthrown in December 2001 .
 The Iranian revolution caused particular concern in neighbouring Iraq . Iraq feared a similar rebellion from its own large population of Shi’ite Muslims .
 Both countries also included large Kurdish populations . Iraq accused Iran of supporting an uprising of the Iraqi Kurds in 1979 . Both countries had large populations .
 At the end of an eight-year war in which an estimated one million people died, neither side had made significant gains . Neither side had been able to make significant gains during the war .
 During the war, Iraq received aid from most of the Arab states . It used chemical weapons against its own Kurdish population, some of whom had supported Iran .
 Debts incurred by Iraq in its war against Iran, territorial claims, disputes over the price to charge for oil, and loss of prestige were all factors that contributed to Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait on 2 August 1990 .
 Iraq annexed Kuwait and could not be persuaded by U.N. sanctions to withdraw . Ignoring international condemnation, the country annexed Kuwait . The annexation was ignored by international condemnation .
 In January 1991 an international alliance led by the United States declared war on Iraq . The war was initially focused on an aerial bombardment of Iraqi military installations . The U.S. declared war in 1991 .
 Ground forces moved in on 24 February, and by the end of February Iraqi troops retreated from Kuwait . Ground forces move in, and Iraqi troops retreat from Kuwait.
 UN-backed ‘no-fly zones’ for Iraqi aircraft north of the 36th and south of the 32nd parallels . Iraq’s subsequent suppression of revolts by Shi’ite Muslims in the south and Kurds in the north led to no-fly zone .
 The whole Iraqi population suffered from punitive economic sanctions . The sanctions were imposed in an attempt to force the Iraqi government to comply with UN requirements to eradicate its weapons of mass destruction .
 In 2003, US-led forces invaded Iraq over its alleged possession of such weapons and overthrew the regime of Saddam Hussein .
 A democratically elected government was established in 2005 but civil order was still a long way from being restored . Civil order was restored in 2005 after a coup duchess was overthrown in 2006 .
 Israel also expanded its territory in 1967 and 1973, although the Sinai region was returned to Egypt in 1979 .
 T Iraq's desire for further oil-rich territory prompted its attacks on Iran in 1980 and on Kuwait in 1990 . T Iraq attacked Iran and Kuwait in 1980 .
 The Russia n Federation is divided into administrative regions that lie directly from Moscow . Since 1993, constituent republics have been eniitled to their own constitutions .
 Around three million Russians returned to their native country during the 1990s . Three million Russians were forced to leave the country to escape discrimination .
 Many Asians migrated to Belarus and Ukraine in the hope of finding an easy route to western Europe . Many Asians migrate to Belarus to find an easy way to get to Europe .
 Heavy industry and collective farms remained under state control, but private individuals could form co-operatives . Heavy industry remained under control, although heavy industry remained in state control .
 Non-profi table firms were no longer propped up by tile state* but allowed to go bankrupt . The state of tile state allowed them to bankrupt .
 Economic growth continued to fall, while crime* inflation and unemployment rose . Nevertheless, economic growth continues to fall . Crime* inflation, unemployment and inflation rose .
 Strikes among miners in 1989 were the first sign of popular discontent at the Soviet Union's economic problems, exacerbated by the Chernobyl nuclear reactor explosion in 1986 and the Armenian earthquake of 1988 .
 President Obama's radical approach to internal affairs was matched by his foreign policy . Obama's foreign policy was matched with his radical stance on internal affairs .
 The withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan in 1988-89, negotiations with the United States to end the arms race* and encouragement of, or tacit support for, Eastern Europe in their bid to free themselves from Soviet domination in 1989-90 .
 Gorbachev was praised abroad for his bold foreign-policy decisions* but his popular support at home was waning . His popularity was waning at home .
 The economic crisis within Russia in the autumn of 199(1 proved a turning point . The crisis in the fall of 2009 proved to be the turning point in Russia's history .
 A “500-day plan"" for rapid market reform was rejected by Gorbachev, as a consequence of which reformers left the government* and under pressure from political hard-liners and military and industrial leaders . Under pressure from hard-line and military, military leaders, Gor
 The Baltic States demanded outright independence but Gorbachev was desperate to keep the Soviet Union together* The rise of Russian nationalism allowed Boris Yeltsin* to return to politics, first as head of the Russian Supreme Soviet and then as democratically elected, anti-communist President of Russia*
 Ethnic tensions and rivalries in the Caucasus region broke out into armed conflicts after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 Many smaller regions within the larger republics battled to achieve autonomy . Smaller regions in the larger Republics battled for autonomy in the past .
 Chechenia declared independence from Russia in 1991, but the Russian army failed to defeat the guerrillas . Grozny and the surrounding region was extensively bombed by the Russian military . The republic achieved de facto independence in 1997, but Russia failed to beat the rebels .
 Georgia was also the scene of armed conflict, both for control of the republic and as a result of successful attempts by the regions of Ossetia and Abkhazia to assert their independence . The regions were also the subject of conflict in the past .
 The republics of Armenia and Azerbaijan waged a bloody war over control of Nagorno-Karabakh, which Armenia won against the rebels . His defiance was largely responsible for the failure of the coup, and his defiance .
 Yeltsin’s position was strengthened, and although Gorbachev was reinstated his power was diminished . Yeltsins’ position was weakened, according to the Russian president .
 Yeltsin inherited the unresolved problems of his predecessor, President of the Russian Federation, President Vladimir Putin, in 1994 .
 Although he introduced rapid market reform, including privatization, the economic decline continued . The economic decline in the country continued .
 Some people made huge profits but savings were wiped out, leading to real hardship among the population . Some of the biggest profits were made by some of the world's richest people .
 The Orthodox Church gained support, as did nationalist, rightwing parties such as Zhirinovsky’s Liberal Democrats .
 Yeltsin did not call new elections for the communist-led Supreme Soviet, now called the duma . He ruled by decree instead of calling for new elections .
 He did not form his own political party, and neither did the democrats, thereby weakening the democratic system . Furthermore, he did not join his own party, nor did the democratic party, as well .
 Yeltsin replaced his reformist prime minister with the more conservative Viktor Chernomyrdin . The duma was the subject of an open conflict between Yeltsins and the duma .
 Yeltsin won public support in a referendum in April 1993, but conflict with the duma continued . The duma was dissolved in September 1993 after a series of clashes with the government .
 The political leaders within the duma proclaimed Yeltsin’s removal from the presidency, with the result that in October they were besieged in the parliament building . In October, the political leaders were besieged by the parliament in the capital's parliament .
 The Russian government ordered an attack on the Kremlin and other key buildings, leading to a three-hour battle . Their response to the attack was to order an attack at the Kremlin .
 Yeltsin, although in ill-health, won the presidential elections of June 1996 . New elections resulted again in a majority for the Nationalists-Communists, but Yeltsins won the election .
 A financial collapse in the summer of 1998 discredited the market reformers and brought a new conflict between Yeltsin and the duma . The latter rejected Yeltsins’ attempt to restore Chernomyrdin as prime minister .
 Nationalism, responsible for the break-up of the Soviet Union, also threatened the Russian Federation . Nationalist demands Nationalism also threatened Russia .
 Autonomous republics, such as Tatarstan and Yakutia, demanded “sovereignty” in which their own laws would take precedence over those of Moscow . Autonomous states such as Yakutya demanded ‘sovere sovereignty’
 Yeltsin’s Union Treaty of March 1992 compromised by granting them considerable autonomy, and finally even Tatarstan signed in February 1994 .
 Chechenia split from Ingushetia and declared independence after the August 1991 coup . Chechnia declared independence in 1991 after a coup .
 In 1999 a fresh Russian offensive was launched against the separatists, but it failed to end their military and terrorist campaign . In 1999 the Russian government launched a fresh offensive against separatists .
 The so-called Dnestr Republic rejected Moldovan rule with Russian military support . Conflict between Russia and Ukraine over the Crimea and over which country should control the ships of the former Soviet navy .
 In Georgia, President Gamsakhurdia’s extreme nationalism led to his overthrow in 1992 . In Georgia he was overthrown in 1992 after extreme nationalism was outlawed .
 Azerbaijan and other oil-rich states in Central Asia attracted Western investment . But a revival of Islamic fundamentalism led to civil war in Tajikistan .
 At the beginning of the 21st century the future of the region remained uncertain, both in economic terms and in relation to democratic reform . At the start of the 20th century, the future remained uncertain .
 Three of the soldiers were killed by the army, which was divided in its support . Three of them were killed in the attack .
 With Gorbachev a prisoner in his summer retreat in the Crimea, Boris Yeltsin, then President of Russia, eventually persuaded the army to stand firm behind him . The communist rebels were defeated by Yeltsins, and thus defeated the communist rebels .
 The collapse of the communist regimes of Eastern Europe occurred between 1989 and 1990 . The collapse was the collapse of communist regimes in Eastern Europe .
 In general, the ""peoples' revolutions"" were carried off relatively peaceably . The revolution was carried out relatively peacefully . The revolutions were carried out peacefully .
 Only in Romania, where the communist regime put up a fight, and in the former Yugoslavia, did fighting break out . The former Yugoslavia was the only place where fighting broke out .
 T hroughout the 1980s the communist regimes of Eastern European underwent a profound crisis . The communist regimes in Eastern Europe underwent a severe crisis .
 The unelected communist governments had trouble maintaining their legitimacy in the eyes of their electorates, but since the radical reforms introduced in the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev they could no longer threaten critics with the ultimate sanction of Soviet military intervention .
 In the most reformist of the communist regimes Hungary the demise was gradual and was managed by the communist government itself . The demise of the Hungarian government itself was gradual .
 Some of its increasingly radical measures had a profound effect on other communist governments . Some of these radical measures were taken by the Communist Party of Yugoslavia .
 The decision, for example, to open the borders with Austria and let thousands of East German ‘tourists” depart for the West forced the East German government into belated attempts to save itself by offering concessions .
 In Poland, the Solidarity movement challenged the hegemony of the state as early as 1979 . The end of communism was negotiated and brought about by partial elections held as a result of negotiations .
 East German and Czechoslovak regimes both collapsed as a result of public demonstrations . The East German regime collapsed after a wave of public protests . The Czech Republic and East Germany also collapsed after demonstrations .
 In Bulgaria the government fell following a coup, which overthrew Todor Zhivkov, and in Romania the end of the Ceausescu regime was brought about by a violent uprising . In Bulgaria, the government was overthrown by a coup .
 All post-communist countries embarked on the construction of a democratic system of government . The conversion of a centrally planned economy into one that was market-led . Post-Communist countries embark on the conversion .
 One of the major problems was their lack of experience of democratic government, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Some institutional and legal changes, such as a multiparty system and free elections, were introduced quite rapidly . But the development of a democratic political culture proved more difficult .
 The bulk of the electorate still expected the state to guarantee not just security but also their well-being . Voters still expected not only security but the state of their well being .
 Increasing inflation and declining Gross Domestic Product caused most people’s living standards to decline . Most people in the U.S. saw their living standards decline .
 Former communists gained support with promises to minimize the negative consequences of economic change . In this economic climate former communists gained significant popular support . Former communists are now in power in Venezuela .
 The problem was how to liberalize and privatize the economy under conditions of relative instability . The problem is how to privatize and liberalize an economy under relative instability, he says .
 Major disagreements existed between the proponents of the gradualist approach and those who advocated the “short, sharp shock treatment” involving simultaneous radical liberalization of prices and large-scale privatization .
 Some countries in which former communists still held power, such as Romania and Bulgaria adopted a slow and inconsistent approach . Others, like Poland, adopted a radical path .
 Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic proved more successful than countries such as Bulgaria and Romania . Poland's success was more pronounced than Bulgaria's success rate .
 In post-communist Czechoslovakia the national grievances felt by many Slovaks resurfaced . The process of industrialization undergone by the region of Slovakia since 1948 left it largely dependent on markets in the Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries .
 This placed it at a disadvantage in the country that was increasingly seeking Western European trading partners . This placed the country at an economic disadvantage, the government says .
 While the Czechs preferred a centralized state, the Slovaks sought a loose confederation . The Czechs sought a free state . The Slovaks wanted a free confederation in order to avoid a central state .
 Yugoslavia's federal system developed by President Tito in the 1950s and 1970s gave some credence to national autonomy while controlling nationalist self-assertion in the constituent republics . In Yugoslavia the federal system was developed by Tito . Tito's system was designed to give some cred
 The economic disparities between the constituent republics and the pressure for democratization gave rise to nationalist resentments . With the decline of communist power, the economic disparities gave rise .
 Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, with Serb population of 2 per cent of the total, achieved independence peaceably in 1991 . Former Yugoslavia achieved peaceably peace in 1991 with the Serb majority of the population .
 The process of independence in Slovenia was accomplished in 1991 with only a brief intervention by the Yugoslav army . The process also included a Serb population of around 2 per cent . Slovenia's independence in 1991 was achieved in a short time .
 Yugoslav army fought on behalf of a Serbian minority of around 12 per cent of the total . In Croatia, the conflict that broke out in 1991, following the Croatian declaration of independence, was more violent, with the Yugoslav army fighting .
 An organized campaign of “ethnic cleansing” was undertaken, principally by the Serbs, with the aim of creating ethnically homogeneous regions in Bosnia as a prelude to its dismemberment and incorporation into Serbia and Croatia . The Serbs' aim was to create ethnically
 In Kosovo, a region in southern Serbia where the large ethnic Albanian population sought independence, violence erupted in 1998 between the Kosovo Liberation Army and the Yugoslav army . Violence erupted in Kosovo, where the majority of ethnic Albanians sought independence .
 Ethnic Albanians in Kosovo became the target of a Serbian campaign of ethnic cleansing . Attempts to bring about a negotiated settlement failed in Kosovo .
 In June 1999, following a NATO campaign of air strikes, Serbian forces withdrew as NATO troops entered Kosovo . Serbian forces pulled out of Kosovo in June 1999 after NATO air strikes in Kosovo .
 Significant Hungarian minorities remain in Romania and Slovakia, and the Bulgarian population is around 10 per cent Turk .
 There is still a sizeable Roma population in Romania, Hungary, Slovakia and the Czech Republic . accurate figures are difficult to come by .
 In the mid1990s Poland's more radical approach appeared to have paid off . At the end of the 20th century it was still unclear as to which country would be the most successful in the long term .
 All the Eastern European countries were keen to join the European Union, but not all passed the EU's various entry criteria . The criteria relate to the effectiveness of both their market economy and their democratic system .
 The government of Serbia was anxious to defend the rights of Serbs throughout the region, and bloody conflicts ensued . The government was anxious for Serbs' rights in the region to defend their rights .
 In 1999 the crisis in Kosovo led to another massive movement of people as over 850,000 ethnic Albanian Kosovans fled from Yugoslavia . The crisis in 1999 led to an exodus of 850,500 ethnic Albanians .
 Talks between the superpowers the U.S. and Soviet Union over the creation of such a force failed . Various alternatives were suggested .
 The term is used to describe efforts made by the United Nations to diffuse civil and regional conflicts . The U.N. has spent millions of dollars in resolving conflicts .
 The United Nations Emergency Force was established by the General Assembly to police and monitor the ceasefire between Egypt and Israel . In the period 1948-56 other UN truce supervision forces were established in areas of dispute .
 In such operations, peacekeepers have acted as intermediaries, with responsibility for helping the belligerents negotiate a settlement . The peacekeeping force has acted as an intermediary in the past .
 Operation in Mozambique in 1992—95. A UN peacekeeping operations mound included efforts to restore or molnloin peace between warring notions, such as the IronIraq Military Observer Group .
 UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus polices the ""green line" between opposing Turkish and Greek Cypriot forces . The force arrived on the island in 1964 to avert a civil war .
 Used in cases of inter-state conflict, it is known as “first” or “classical” peacekeeping . Called ‘first’ or ‘classical peacekeeping” Peacekeeping .
 It attempts to bring about an end to the fighting, separate the opposing forces and encourage the creation of a lasting peace .
 Such operations have usually included the supply of UN humanitarian assistance to the affected civilian population . UN humanitarian aid has been provided to the civilian population in the past .
 From the 1960s to the late 1980s classical peacekeeping was used in the majority of peacekeeping operations . The United Nations Force in Cyprus was deployed on the island in 1964 in order to separate warring Turkish and Greek Cypriot communities, and the United Nations Disengagement Observer
 All of the UN’s peacekeeping efforts between 1948 and 1990 were constrained by the existence of the Cold War . The majority of conflicts were affected to some degree by rivalry between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 This occurs when the UN becomes involved in intra-state conflicts in ‘failed states’, where governmental functions are suspended, infrastructure is destroyed, populations are displaced and armed conflict rages .
 In these circumstances the UN has performed three different peacekeeping roles . The UN has been involved in three peacekeeping missions in the past .
 First, it has acted as a neutral force and honest broker between warring factions . It is seeking to encourage the negotiation and implementation of a peace agreement and conduct national elections .
 This was the case with the United Nations Angola Verification Missions from 1989 onwards and the UN mission to Cambodia in 1991-95 . The missions include those from Angola, Angola and Cambodia .
 In 2004 the Greek Cypriots rejected a UN plan to reunify the island because they felt it gave too many concessions to the Turks . In 2004 they rejected the UN plan, saying it gave them too much concessions .
 There are also two British military bases on the island, under an agreement made when Cyprus became independent in 1960 . Cyprus has two British bases, under a deal made when it became independent .
 Second, it has interposed itself between warring parties to ensure the delivery of humanitarian aid to the war-torn population, as in the case of the U.N. Operations in Somalia in 1992-95 .
 "Second generation" peacekeeping has been used to create a stable environment for the re-establishment of democracy . Peacekeeping has also been used in Namibia, Haiti and the U.N. Mission in Haiti .
 In the case of the UN operations in Bosnia, Somalia and Rwanda, however, the UN did not have the consent of the various warring factions . The UN has been involved in the operations in both Bosnia and Rwanda .
 The UN was forced by the international community to act in the interests of the civilian populations, the UN says . The UN says it was forced to act by the world to protect the civilians .
 The UN’s hasty reaction to such demands resulted in clouded mandates, which made the implementation of peacekeeping problematic . The UN has been criticized for its hasty response to demands for peacekeeping .
 Peacekeeping is inherently risky, and almost 2,000 peacekeepers have lost their lives since 1948 . Peacekeepers have been killed in Afghanistan, Afghanistan and Eritrea .
 UN’s role has also at times been compromised by a failure to remain neutral . A large force sent to the Congo in 1960 by the Security Council became involved in fighting against the Soviet-orientated prime minister, Patrice Lumumba .
 UN peacekeeping operations have generally worked well where the task is fairly limited and clear cut such as the patrolling of ceasefire lines in Cyprus . But when the situation is more complex, as in Rwanda or Bosnia, the UN peacekeepers have often found themselves out of their depth .
 Peacekeeping has, in many cases, assisted in ending war and in creating the conditions in which the causes of the war can be addressed through diplomacy, and the economic and social reconstruction of a war-torn country can commence . Nevertheless, peacekeeping has helped end war and create the conditions
 Kofi Annan was elected Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1996 the first black African to hold the position . Annan is a Ghanaian diplomat .
 Among the crises in which he became involved as peace-maker in the late 1990s were those arising from events in Bosnia and Iraq .
 Sarajevo was besieged and the UN attempted to keep the airport open to allow supplies to be flown in . The UN tried to keep airport open as part of an effort to get supplies into the city .
 The UN force was forced to withdraw from two of the areas in the summer of 1995, leaving them to be overrun by Bosnian Serbs . The force lacked sufficient military strength, however, to implement their policy .
 Many South American countries experienced periods of right-wing dictatorship during the 1970s and early 1980s . In addition, democratic processes were reinstated in many countries, including Brazil .
 In Africa some of the newly democratic countries have slipped back to being one-party states . In others there has been clear evidence of rigged elections . However, in many countries democracy is only tenuously established .
 The majority of the world's countries now support the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . The Covenant was adopted by the UN in 1966 and sets out a range of rights, including freedom of conscience, freedom from torture and slavery .
 The Declaration was to be a ‘common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations’ during the second half of the 20th century efforts were made to define, articulate and enforce the fundamental rights of all peoples of all nations .
 The United Nations, chartered in 1945, was not the first body to recognize and assert basic human rights . The U.N. was not one of the first bodies to recognize human rights in the world .
 The first ten amendments to the U.S. Constitution outline what early Americans believed to be their inalienable rights . The Bill of Rights was written in 17th century .
 The League of Nations was established as a result of the Treaty of Versailles . It drew up conventions on slavery and forced labour conventions . The League was established by the treaty's Treaty of Peace in 1918 .
 The United Nations was the most powerful force in the field of human rights in the 20th century . The breadth of conventions created in the first 50 years of its existence surpassed those of any prior body . The U.N. was the world's most powerful human rights body .
 They cover areas such as employment, the rights of children, refugees, development, war crimes and the eradication of hunger and malnutrition . They also cover areas of employment, children, refugee, development and development .
 The UN has turned its attention to the rights of people to economic and social development and to peace and security . The earliest conventions were generally concerned with civil and political rights, while more recently they have turned their attention to economic, social development .
 In the first half of the 20th century most democratic governments were to be found in countries in Europe and in North and South America . In some sections of society were still barred from voting for reasons of ethnic origin, gender or income .
 After the Second World War, elective democracy spread to the great majority of countries in the world . But the fifth of the world’s population who live in the People’S Republic of China were still not able to exercise full democratic rights .
 It remains to be seen how the spread of democracy will affect human rights in the U.S. democracy .
 Governments often go to great lengths to ensure that political rivals are silenced . Human rights abuses, including imprisonment without a fair trial, torture and execution, are common .
 Discrimination on the basis of religion often occurs when a religious group is seen as a threat to the status quo because of demands for autonomy . Discrimination on religious grounds is difficult to distinguish it from discrimination on ethnic or political grounds, such as ethnic and political grounds .
 An example of sectarian conflict is Ireland, where British rule and domination by Protestants was resisted by Catholics for centuries .
 Six of the nine northern counties of Ulster remained part of the United Kingdom, albeit with their own parliament . Ulster was one of the most populous parts of the country .
 Protestants predominated in much of the north, but there was still a sizeable Catholic minority . Catholics were underrepresented in the political system, and in the allocation of public housing and of public investment .
 Catholic civil rights movement in Northern Ireland in the late 1960s led to clashes between Protestant and Catholic paramilitary groups and civilians, as a result of which the British army was deployed in the province . These factors led to the development of a Protestant civil rights .
 The introduction of internment in 1971 was seen by many Catholics as a transgression of their civil and political rights . An escalation of political violence ensued after the introduction of the internment .
 In March 1972 the Northern Ireland parliament was dissolved and direct rule imposed from London . Direct rule was imposed in Northern Ireland from London following the dissolution of the parliament .
 On flood Friday 1998 an agreement was brokered between political representatives of the two sides . The agreement established a Northern Ireland Assembly with both Catholic and Protestant representation .
 The assembly and accompanying executive were subsequently suspended amid further disagreement between Protestant and Catholic leaders . However, the new assembly was subsequently suspended .
 This was partly due to people seeking refuge from poverty, persecution and economic and environmental disasters . People seeking refuge also sought asylum from poverty and persecution, including wars and persecution .
 Refugees often end up in the poorest countries, which lack money to support their own Citizens, let alone refugees . The poorest countries often don't have enough resources to support themselves and refugees .
 These displaced populations arc a growing concern to the international community . Displaced people are a large part of the refugee population in Syria .
 The provision of basic human rights on a world scale seems an immense task . A strong international legal foundation has been laid for the respect of human rights in the world, says Amnesty International .
 The reluctance of the international community to use economic and military' sanctions against governments that abuse human rights is likely to continue . The ineffectual nature of these sanctions means that world* wide transgressions of human rights will continue .
 Demands for autonomy by minority groups, including Bosnian Muslims and Kosovan Albanians in a The piviskom of Ireland 1922 Cdtiota os perceruoge of pgpjtasicn.
 Ch9QS I [ufrSfo lafTiser Tugasfewa,, and ihe Kurds in Iraq and turkey, have resulled in attempts by ihe governments cantwned to suppress entire peoples ond eradicate their cullures .
 In several European countries, including France nnd Switzerland, women were not given the right to vote uniil after Ihe Second World War .
 In some countries, women were granted the right to vote partly in recognition of the contribution they made towards the struggle for independence from colonial rule . In other countries, such as the United States and most Western European nations, the female franchise was preceded by long fights for political equality .
 Improving women’s lives has become an international concern in the 20th century . Improving the lives of women in the world has become a global concern .
 Women's lives differ from men’s in every area, in eluding education, health and employment, in ways that have not always been readily apparent . Women are more likely to be more successful than men in every aspect of their lives .
 Use of gender as a category of analysis in measuring quality of people’s lives has greatly changed perceptions of the social interactions of women and men . Gender inequality means different things in different cultures, but the use of gender to measure quality of life has changed perceptions .
 The increased desire in the 20th century to recognize the importance of women s daily lives has also led to greater scrutiny of the employment of women and the ways in which work is measured .
 International statistics indicate the extent to which women are participating in paid employment . They indicate the type of job in which they are employed and the extent of their participation .
 1995 United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in lSeijing stressed the importance of valuing unpaid labour .
 In the industrialized world work is often valued by the remuneration attached to it . Work is valued by how much it is taken for a living .
 Volunteer, domestic and childrearing work (unpaid labour) has been devalued and, in terms of statistics, gone i in reported . Unpaid labour that is most often performed by women is devalued by women .
 Activities such as subsistence production anti housework, in which a large proportion of women in developing countries are involved, are now being measured more effectively, although progress remains to be made .
 In short, women often experience a poorer quality of life than their male counterparts . Women often suffer a poorer life than men, according to experts .
 Overall there has been a global trend towards improvement in the provision of secondary education for girls . This disguises the fact that within individual countries attendance at school may be affected by war or economic difficulties .
 When assessing improvements in women’s lives it is necessary to look at more than one variable . Furthermore, when assessing improvements, it is . necessary to . look at other variables, such as the quality of women's lives .
 Women may still be represented in fewer than 10 per cent of administrative and managerial jobs . In countries that granted women the vote relatively early (such as Switzerland, Honduras and Botswana) more than 30 per cent are in such employment .
 One indication of women’s status in society is the number who are political representatives, specifically those holding ministerial-level appointments . The number of women holding ministerial level appointments is an indication of society's status .
 There have often been long periods between the enfranchisement of women and the election of the first woman to the national parliament .
 At the end of the 20th century there was still little female representation worldwide . At the beginning of the century there were still little women represented worldwide .
 Asia and South America women are largely responsible for ihe agricultural work done in iheir community . Even in a country such as the United Stales, where over 50 per cent of women are women .
 Noi noi only provide families with load, but they frequently produce cash cops for sale in local markets . They often produce cash police officers for sale at local markets in order to raise money .
 In several countries of Asia and southern Africa more women than men ore in paid employment . However, in several countries more women are in paid jobs than men .
 There seems to be a twoway effect whereby education gives women the information and confidence to make family-planning decisions . Access to contraception gives young women the opportunity to fulfil their educational potential before starting a family .
 In many countries, girls are expected to leave school and work in the home or the fields . Girls might receive a primary education, but they are then expected to work at home or in the fields.
 Some cultures still consider secondary education for girls a largely wasted investment . Girls' education is considered a wasted investment by some cultures .
 Many of the changes brought about in women’s lives have come not from governments but from grassroots activists . Non-governmental organizations have helped change the lives of women around the world .
 Women have found that they can bring about change through participation in professional groups, trade unions, locally elected bodies and a growing number of non-governmental organizations . Women may be poorly represented in the traditional spheres of national politics . Of which there are estimated to be 30,000 worldwide .
 Such groups have allowed women’s concerns to be voiced and supported on local, national and international levels, enabling them to build the skills necessary to exert political pressure and to collect statistical information .
 The past century has witnessed vast changes in the way some men and women perceive women’s roles . But disparities still exist between the lives of men and woman still exist, and progress remains made .
 Women's rights have become human rights and the work of women has begun to be recognized as having no less an impact on society and the economy than that of men . Women’s rights have now become a matter of human rights .
 The first female Representative was elected in 1917 . The U.S. Constitution did not actually prohibit women from standing for office . Women were not allowed to stand for office until 1917 .
 The majority of Congresswomen have come from the eastern states and the west coast . Vermont, New Hampshire and Delaware were among those which had still never elected a woman .
 There is a strong correlation between the percentage of a country's women who are literate and its fertility rate . There is also a correlation between literacy and fertility rates in countries .
 Women in industrialized nations have smaller families than those in non-industrialized nations . Literacy rates are much higher in industrialized countries, but education provision for girls is often limited .
 The oil crisis of 1973—74 arose largely as a result of the Arab-lsroeli War . V The crisis was largely the result of a war between Arab nations .
 The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (QPEC1) controls the majority of the world's oil exports . The organization 9o place on embargo on Ihe supply of oil to those nations that supported Israel .
 Id Id the industrialized world severely disrupted production and oil prices soared . The subsequent shortage of oil was the result of a shortage in the world .
 Japan ravaged, with manufacturing and agricultural output severely disrupted . Japan's economy hit hard by the earthquake and tsunami .
 The European Recovery Programme provided U.S. investment tor Western European economies from 1948 to 1951 . i*s strength became a mainspring of recovery in Europe, and helped speed up the process .
 By 1951 all Western European economies had at least recovered to their highest pre-war level of output and were entering a ""golden age"" of growth that was to last until the first oil crisis in 1973 . Co-operation between Europe and the United States aided recovery .
 New institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, were designed by the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Eretton Woods .
 The U.S. was, and has remained, the wealthiest economy in the world . For the early part of the post-war period it was also the major source of technological change .
 In 1975 the total value of such multinationals’ overseas stock was 4. per cent of world output, rising to 9 per cent by 1994 . In 1975, the value of the overseas stock of these multinationals was just 4 per cent .
 About a quarter of the stock is located outside the major industrialized nations . The company is spreading new technologies to newly industrializing countries . It is spread outside major industrialized countries .
 OPEC engineered two substantial increases in the price of oil, largely through the tactic of restricting supply . This growth was based on high levels of T.E. production .
 Price of oil dropped again from the mid-1900s onwards as member rations ignored OPf C's limitations on exports . The price of oil subsequently dropped again as member members of the OPEC-controlled group ignored the limitations .
 PART 5: Investing investment, the import of U.S. technologies, and improvements in the quality of the workforce through education and training . Part 5: The import of United States technologies, the . import of . United States technology, and the quality . of the . workforce through
 By 1970 the 20 countries with the highest GDP per capita were mainly to be found in Europe . The world’s wealth was concentrated largely in the North Atlantic .
 Japan entered the “top 20” economies for the first time in 1970 . Developments in East Asia were just as remarkable, with Japan entering the top 20 .
 Japan’s output had grown by more than 9 per cent a year since 1950, driven by high investment and the rapid adoption and adaptation of U.S. technology .
 The average length of time spent in primary and secondary education has risen from 9 to 12 years . The skills of the workforce had also improved rapidly, with the average time spent at school rising to 12 .
 Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries a cartel whose Arab members were the most powerful placed an embargo on oil exports to the nations that supported Israel in the Arab-Israeli War . The extent to which this made them vulnerable became all too apparent in 1973 when the embargo was placed .
 Oil suddenly became scarce and prices rose sharply causing major disruption in the U.S. and Europe . The price of oil rose sharply, causing major disruptions in the United States and Europe.
 A major slowdown in activity followed, and it took the advanced economies time to recover . The advanced economies took more than a decade to recover from the recession .
 The richer European countries had largely caught up with the United States by this time, with the result that their growth was beginning to slow from 4 per cent per annum to a figure closer to the U.S level .
 With a post-1979 growth rate of only 1.5 per cent in Western Europe, unemployment rose sharply . Western Europe's post-1980s growth rate was 1.7 per cent .
 In Japan growth remained high at 3 per cent, although this is well below the level of 8 per cent during the golden age . In Japan, growth remained at 3.5 per cent .
 Countries adopted different growth strategies after 1950 . Openness and growth in the modern world is a key part of the growth strategy .
 Latin America, Africa and some in Asia opted for a more self-sufficient approach . Those in Latin America and many in Africa have opted for home-produced goods instead of imports .
 The open strategy made it necessary for these countries to react to external demands, says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 As the world moved, especially after 1970, beyond simple mass production towards the specialized production of high-technology products, the countries that had adopted the strategy of openness became increasingly successful .
 Lessons have been learnt, and trading arrangements that remove barriers between member nations are becoming more common .
 The European Union expanded in 2004 to include ten eastern European states . The EU is one of the oldest trading blocs in the world . It is now the largest trading bloc in Europe .
 Its barriers to external trade stimulate inward investment by countries such as Japan . The barriers are meant to encourage inward investment .
 East Asians have set up an outward-looking bloc in APEC in an attempt to stimulate trade . The East Asians set up the bloc in a bid to boost trade in the region .
 As they learnt in the economic crisis of 1997-98, openness may aid growth, but it can leave their economies vulnerable to the vagaries of the world market . However, as they learnt, openness can also leave them vulnerable .
 A large proportion of its population continues to live without what are regarded as basic amenities such as running water in the industrialized world .
 A country's openness to trade is calculated by adding together the value of exports and imports and dividing the total by its Gross Domestic Product . The value of trade and imports is added to the total of the country's GDP .
 In countries such as Argentina (with the lowest ""openness"" score) trade represents less than 12 per cent of its GDP . Others import manufactured parts, assemble them into products, and export the finished goods . Singapore is the prime example, of which Singapore is a prime example .
 In general the economies of those countries that have been open to trade have expanded most rapidly . The contrast between low growth rates in some countries of South America and Africa and Southeast Asia is seen in the contrast .
 The western European economies have also grown rapidly because trade barriers have fallen within the region . Much of Europe is now one large market, with much of Europe becoming one large European market .
 The population explosion of the 20th century is the result of better health care, nutrition, education and sanitary conditions . The Gulf states in the Middle East have seen the largest increases, mainly because of their oil revenues .
 Conditions have aided population growth even in the face of disasters such as famines and epidemics . These conditions have aided growth even though they have led to famines .
 High population growth rates can also put pressure on public services . High living standards can lead to a fall in living standards, poor nutrition, inadequate education and high unemployment .
 The negative aspects of high population growth are compounded in developing regions (where over 75 per cent of the world's population lives) because of greater incidence of poverty and economic instability .
 Most countries do not have the resources to support such large populations and the number of people without access to food, sanitation . Most countries are not equipped to support large populations .
 Over half al the world's population now lives in South, East and Southeast Asia . The inuwra in global papulation has  derated rapidly since 1950, although it is projected to slow down somewhat .
 The total population for the year 2G25 could be as high as 8 billion . Despite indications that the rate of growth is slowing slightly, projections say 8 billion people .
 The ten largest cities in the 1990s all had aver ten million inhabitants . The mojorily were to be found in the newly industrializing world .
 In 1900 there were only a handful of titles with papulations of over a miHion . By 2000 such settlements were scattered liberally around the globe .
 Part 5 safe water and health services increases as the population grows . Part 5: Health and water services increase as the country grows .
 The inability of a country to provide for its citizens’ basic needs affects its chances of maintaining or achieving economic and social growth . Furthermore, a country’s inability of providing basic services affects its economic growth, it says .
 Balancing the growth of the population with the Earth’s resources is crucial for a healthy population and continued development . Balancing population growth with Earth's resources and society's ability to provide these basic necessities is crucial, says the author of the book .
 Low rates of growth per annum can result in significant increases in population over a few generations . Thus, what may appear as low growth per year can actually result in a significant increase in population growth . The population may grow at low rates per year, according to experts .
 Recognition of the adverse effects of our burgeoning population assisted in reducing growth rates in the 1980s and 1990s . Recognition helped in reducing population growth rates at the time .
 This was achieved through a combination of improved education and the wider availability of contraceptives . This is achieved through better education and wider availability .
 While growth rates in developing regions have decreased, many will remain as high as 3% or more in the 21st century . However, growth rates will remain at 3% in some areas of the world .
 European countries currently reflect the lowest rates of growth . Some countries such as Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, Latvia and Estonia have negative growth rates, leading to population decline .
 When coupled with the migration of people into cities, population decreases affect rural communities most severely . Rural communities are affected by the population decrease .
 Before the 20th century comparatively few people lived in cities, and the urbanization that occurred was largely the result of industrialization . The urbanization of cities was largely due to industrialization and urbanization in the past .
 Urbanization is now also a result of migration into the cities of people from agricultural areas unable to support them financially . Urbanization also also also the result of people moving into cities .
 Populations have not only moved from rural environments to cities within their own country . Populations also have moved into cities within the country's borders .
 In many cases these migrations have resulted in significant minority cultures developing in the host nation . In many of these cases, migration has resulted in a significant minority culture developing .
 Many countries in the developed world now have multicultural populations . People with racially mixed backgrounds are becoming more common .
 Demographic ageing is predicted to occur in developing countries, assuming current improvements in life expectancy . Population of many developed countries are getting older as a result of falling birth rates .
 This demographic shift towards societies in which older people predominate can be a positive reflection of a country’s health and prosperity . But it also signals the need for changes in the structure of the labour force, and for a shift away from a youth-centered culture .
 Growing and demographically changing populations have many implications for societies around the world in terms of standards of living, trends in health and ill-health, and quality of the environment .
 The world's population has always been migratory to a certain extent, but the 20th century saw increased movement . The 20th Century saw increased numbers of people in the world .
 This was partly due to economic factors but also as a result of political pressure and war . This is partly because of economic factors, but also because of the war and political pressure, it is said .
 European Jews were forced by German Nazism to seek asylum elsewhere in Europe and in the U.S. in the 1930s . European Jews, an increasing number of whom migrated to Israel after the First World War, were forced to flee to Israel .
 Most of those who did not escape were transported to death camps in eastern Europe . Most of the survivors were taken to the death camps, including those who died .
 Stalinist policies in the Soviet Union also resulted in millions of people being forced into Siberian labour camps . Millions of people were forced to spend their lives in Siberian camps .
 Since the Second World War, major migrations have taken place in Asia and Africa as a result of war . Economic migrants from developing countries have sought work in North America, Europe and the Gulf states .
 A worldwide increase in life expectancy during the 2l)th century suggested that the human population was the healthiest it had ever been . However, at the end of the 20th century millions of |>eople continued to live in poverty and had no access to adequate food, safe
 New infectious diseases, such as AIDS and Hepatitis C, had spread across the world . New epidemics of older infections, like cholera and yellow fever, had also broken out .
 Treatment of bacterial infections after making huge advances with penicillin in the 1940s had been complicated by the evolution of drug-resistant bacteria . Treatment had been made easier with the introduction of penicill in the 1950s .
 NIV/AID5 is taking an increasing hold in many lountiies of Southeast Asia and in Africa south of the Sahara . HIV infection rate is beginning to siabifae or decline .
 An attempt to curb the spread of dtsaase is often hampered by iasuffkieni medfcol families . Health education projects have been achieved by health education projects that pul across safe-sex message .
 Kinee the 1950s life expectancy has increased by over 50 per cent in developing regions and by 12 per cent and higher in industrial countries, to approximately (S3 and 7-1 years respectively .
 Global immunization programmes have reduced the occurrence of diseases such as tuberculosis and measles . They have helped to contain the spread of many controllable diseases, such as measles .
 Health measures have contributed substantially to a fall in infant and child mortality rates . New and better vaccines continually being developed .
 At the end of the 20th century, poverty affected over one billion children and adults throughout the world . Poverty was a major cause of this, affecting over 1 billion people and adults .
 Lack of funds for basie needs naturally leads to undernourishment a higher susceptibility to disease . Lack of money for basies leads to a higher risk of disease, experts say .
 Some of the most extreme poverty is to lie found in the growing number of urban centres . Public health systems cannot keep up with the demands placed on them by growing populations .
 The high death rates from cancers and heart and circulatory diseases in developed countries are partly due to greater life expectancy . But they are also undoubtedly related to unhealthy lifestyles .
 While wealthier, industrialized countries often have better education, their populations also tend to have unhealthy diets, indulge in excessive drinking and smoking, and suffer from lack of exercise .
 The populations of industrial countries, and of large cities throughout the world, are also plagued by pollution . Air pollution is thought to be causing an alarming rise in respiratory problems such as asthma .
 Infectious and parasitic diseases account for the majority of deaths in developing countries . In developing countries, infectious and parasitic disease account for most of the deaths .
 HIV is believed to lead to AIDS, of whom 95 per cent live in the developing world . Water-borne diseases (such as cholera, typhoid, diarrhoea and guinea worm disease) are also common .
 In the 1990s the World Health Organization estimated that 78 per cent of people living in developing countries still had no access to safe water .
 Shortage of water is projected to become an increasing problem in the 21st century . Population is growing in areas where there is little available . Water shortages are projected to be increasing in areas of the world .
 Advances in agricultural science and practice are being made in order to make the best use of limited resources . But international conflicts threaten to break out over use of river water .
 Health promotion programmes help people take steps to improve their overall health . Instead of just treating illness, health promotion programmes aim to help people improve their health . Health promotion programmes help people take steps to improve their own health .
 Widespread immunization programmes, better education and nutrition, and increased access to family planning services all contributed to reductions in infant mortality rate during the latter part of the 20th century .
 Preventive health practices are fighting for a stronger foothold in the use of addictive substances . One area of preventive health practices is fighting for stronger foothold is in addictive substance use .
 WHO statistics indicate that nearly one third of all adults smoke (and nearly half of all men) Most people start smoking before they reach the age of 20 .
 Many developed countries have seen a significant decline in consumption since the 1970s . But the tobacco industry continues to seek an expansion of its market .
 Cigarette smoking in industrialized countries is on the increase . Health departments and practitioners expect to see an upsurge in smoking-related heart disease and cancers .
 Human health is possibly the most important issue facing the world in the 21st century . It is both affected by and has an impact on environmental and demographic changes, and on social and cultural developments .
 Most of the developed countries managed to reduce their rates by over 60 per cent between the 1960s and the late 1990s .
 In many countries the infant death rate has been cut substantially in real terms . While the developing world has, on the whole, not managed such large percentage drops, it has not .
 Mozambique, Liberia, Ethiopia, Somalia, Afghanistan and Somalia consume less per head of population . The five countries consuming least per head per head are Ethiopia, Ethiopia and Somalia . Mozambiquique consumes the most per head population .
 Periods of drought in sub-Saharan Africa have severely affected agricultural production . Drought has been exacerbated by war in many areas, exacerbated by conflict .
 In other parts of the world, China, Cambodia and North Korea, the policies of political leaders have been responsible for millions of deaths from starvation .
 T It is estimated that around a third of the global adult population smokes . Around a quarter of the world's adult population is estimated to smoke .
 Smoking is declining in parts of the industrialized world, but in other areas, notably China, smoking is becoming increasingly popular . Smoking is also becoming more popular in Western Pacific .
 The World Health Organization estimated that in the mid-1990s over 60 per cent of Chinese men smoked . The WHO estimated in the 1990s that over 60% of men in China smoked .
 Gross World Output (the total amount of money generated worldwide in 1050 was S3,8 trillion) in 1050 . Gross World Outcome (Gross World Outcomes) in 10,000 years was $3.8 trillion . World output was $1.2 trillion in 1950s
 This near-tenfold increase was not, however, distributed evenly around the world . This is not the case for the first time since 2000 .
 At least half of the extra wealth was created by the United States, Japan and the countries of Western Kit rope, where per capita incomes grew markedly . By contrast, elsewhere in the world economic underdevelopment and high population growth rates resulted in per capita income decreasing .
 The disparity between those with an income sufficient to provide a decent standard of living and the poorest members of society is noticeable . Equally noticeable, however, is the disparity within a country between the income of those with a decent living and those of society .
 In the United States the “poverty line 71 is calculated in relation to the cost of providing a nourishing diet for one person tor one year . In the U.S. the poverty line is calculated as a figure of 71 per cent .
 In 1996, 15 per cent of the U.S. population was considered to be living below the poverty line . A disproportionate number from minority ethnic groups were considered to live below the line .
 In some European Union countries poverty is defined in relative terms, giving a typical figure of between 2 and 6 per cent . In some EU countries it is defined as 'relative terms'
 Despite the wide disparity of incomes within the industrialized countries, the majority of their populations have their most basic health and educational needs met .
 Free access to doctors and schools is by no means universal in non-industrialized countries . In many non industrialized countries, free access to schools and doctors is no longer universal .
 The United Nations in 1990 developed an index that defined and measured human development . The disparity between the conditions experienced by the populations of the richest and poorest nations of the world prompted the U.N. to develop an index .
 Human Development Index scores a country on the basis of the age to which a baby born in that country' might be expected to live . The index is based on the life expectancy of a child born in the country .
 In so doing it takes into account not only the general health of the population, but also the infant mortality rate . Infant mortality rate is taken into account .
 At the end of the 20th century' life expectancy was still over 10 per cent in many nondndustriulized countries . Average life expectancy at birth at birth of between 40 and 50 years old .
 Those who survive the early years of life can expect to live well beyond their forties . However, those who survive early life expect to survive well beyond the forties.
 In Malaw i, a girl who has survived until 15 years of age can expect to live, on average, until she is 62 years old . For example, in Malawi, an infant mortality rate is around 14 per cent .
 In many countries improved health care, including vaccination, has resulted in substantial increases in life expectancy for children and adults .
 Programmes to provide access to fresh water are also helping to improve the health of young and old people alike . Water is helping to raise the quality of people’s lives .
 In 1959 the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed that a The child is entitled to receive education, which shall be free and compulsory', at least in the elementary stages . Education became, for the first time in history, the right of young people worldwide .
 In 1962 the UN went further and attempted to remove barriers to education for such reasons as sex, religion, ethnic group and economic conditions . In 1962, the UN tried to remove such barriers by removing them from education .
 Education thus became the right of all people, hut the extent to w hich they are given the opportunity to exercise that right remains highly variable, depending on where a person lives and whether they are male or female .
 Their resources are meagre, however, in comparison with those available to the countries of the industrialized world .
 Primary education begins at any time between the ages of 5 and 7 and provides basic elements of education . The majority of children now receive some form of schooling .
 Secondary education and tertiary education experienced an even more startling increase during the second half of the 20th century, with enrolments more than doubling . Secondary education in institutions such as middle and high schools, vocational schools, colleges and universities .
 The take-up of higher education was highest in North American countries . Sub-Saharan Africa and China had the lowest take-ups in higher education .
 High primary education enrolment levels did not necessarily mean high levels of post-primary education . High primary enrolment does not mean high post-secondary education levels . High post-school enrolment rates do not mean higher post-education levels .
 Many countries experienced setbacks in educational progress in the 1980s as war and decreased aid and trade led to cutbacks in government provision of free education . War, decreased aid, trade cutbacks led to cuts in free education in many countries .
 Enrolment in school often drops if parents have to shoulder the burden of paying for their children’s education . Parents may keep their children at home to provide vital agricultural labour, or because they cannot afford to clothe them properly .
 At the end of the 20th century education was just one of the necessities denied to many of the world’s population . The need for a redistribution of monetary wealth and natural resources on a worldwide basis is urgent .
 The focus of each country continues to be on how it can best provide for its own citizens and operate in a growing global economy . However, each country will continue to focus on how best to provide its citizens .
 Some of the poorest nations spend free access to a decent education for all . The poorest nations in the world spend a fraction of their budgets on education .
 It ranks the countries of the world according to both their development score and their GNP per capita . It also ranks each country's development score .
 Some countries (particularly those in eastern Europe and former Soviet Union) achieve a much higher development ranking than would be expected from their GNP per capita . Others (particularly many of the Arab oil states) are lower than expected . The development rankings of other, comparatively wealthy, countries are lower
 Many do not even have desks, while books, paper and writing equipment are all in short supply . Books, paper, writing equipment and books are also scarce in the area .
 Once the trees have been removed, however, the land will only be used for a short while for agricultural and graring purposes . Once the land has been cleared, the lopsofl becomes nuiritionally depleted or eroded .
 Changes in the environment range from those readily visible such as deforestation, desertification and smog to less visible phenomena such as climate change, damage to the upper ozone layer, mineral depletion, water pollution and the extinction of plants and insects .
 Although these changes began to occur before the 20th century, it is only since the 1960s that they have been brought to public attention .
 Annual av«roge global tompenrtures showed a marked increose during Ihe wond half of ihe 20th century . The ihree hottest years af ihe cenfury attuning in the 1990s were in the 90s .
 A Ttie law-lying region af the Canges della would be severely affected by a one-metre rise in sen level .
 One of the mast densely populated regions of the world can ill afford to lose fertile land in this way . World leaders met in London to discuss the state of the environment .
 For cultural, economic and geographic reasons, numerous divergent views arc held on the state of the environment . But it is generally agreed that some environmental monitoring and action is necessary .
 "sustainable development" is an approach to the use of the Earth s natural resources that does not jeopardize the well-being of future generations . The concept is important in environmental theory at the beginning of the 21st century .
 The Earth’s average temperature has always fluctuated naturally . Many believe that emission of GG 2 from the burning of fossil fuels such as coal and oil are increasing the greenhouse ef/eet and have been responsible for a rise of around 0.5° Celsius (1°
 The larger industrial countries emit most , although many are now working towards curtailing, or at least stabilizing, their emissions . Many of the world's largest emitters are now aiming to reduce their emissions in the future .
 Countries that have industrialized only recently are reluctant to restrict their industrial development or invest in new technology necessary' to bring about a reduction . However, countries that have industrialized only recently .
 Forests naturally absorb harmful CO-., and deforestation also contributes to rising CO, levels . Forests also contribute to rising levels of CO-levels . Deforestation contributes to CO levels .
 The accidents at Three Mile Island in the U.S. and Chernobyl in the Ukraine in 1986 have led many to see the nuclear industry as one of the major threats to humans and to the environment .
 Part 5 4 Acid deposition and urban pouimoN1990s fiamy aid ieptttav r~i pH hess rtian: 4.5 . Part 5: Acid deposition, acid deposition, and urban pollution .
 Acid deposition is caused by high levels of sulphur and nitrogen being discharged into the atmosphere by industrial processes and combining with water vapour and oxygen to form acids . Sod Paula SanK ago*
 The acidic particles can fall close to the site of their source, causing pollution and erosion of city buildings . They can be carried hundreds of kilometres away by prevailing winds, to affect vegetation in rural areas .
 The increasing use of motorized transport has contributed to unacceptable levels of pollution in many of the world's cities . Despite attempts by many governments to clean up the air in their cities, many have contributed to dangerous levels of air pollution .
 An increasing demand for electricity is made by the world’s industries . Industrialization and globalization is a key factor in electricity demand .
 Industrialization can lead to increase in air and water pollution, to changes in land use and to rapidly growing urban environments . Industrialization provides many benefits, such as increased wealth, employment and self-sufficiency .
 One of the effects of industrialization has been increased emission into the atmosphere of sulphur and nitrogen . Industrialization has also increased emission of nitrogen and sulphur in the atmosphere .
 This falls back to Earth, either as dry deposits, or, combined with natural moisture, as “acid rain’s” It is not only damaging trees and natural vegetation but also affecting crops and fish stocks in freshwater lakes .
 Technological developments have helped to create a global economy in which people, products and information can move easily around the world .
 Aircraft, ships, trains, trains and passenger and heavy goods vehicles all pollute the environment . However, aircraft, ships and trains require large-scale changes to the landscape .
 Since the 1960s, regulations have been established regarding offshore oil drilling, navigation and fisheries .
 The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea came into force in 1994 . It gives countries economic control over their coastal regions, but also the obligation to monitor and regulate marine pollution .
 Global efforts are being made to conserve land and protect ecosystems . But preservation or protection is costly and may be hard to achieve in countries whose resources are already insufficient to meet population needs .
 The notion of sustainable development requires changes in the way people live their lives, and in the relative importance they assign to consumption over protection of the Earth’s resources . Changes that are difficult to achieve are hard to achieve, says author .
 Coral reefs (which cover less than 1 per cent of the ocean floor) are susceptible to damage caused by destructive fishing techniques, recreational use, changing sea levels and chemical pollution . Coral reefs provide habitats for about 25 per cent .
 The Wright brothers made the first flight in a motorized aircraft at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina in 1903 . Their invention was recognized as a milestone in transportation history .
 At the beginning of the century' steamboats and trains were well-established methods of transport worldwide . The use of the recently invented telephone and car was spreading through the industrialized nations .
 In vast areas of the nonindustrialized world, millions of people continue to live in real villages, excluded from, or touched only lightly by, the technological wonders of the late 20th century .
 Gars were initially owned only by the well-off, but the innovation of mass-produced, and therefore relatively inexpensive, ears greatly expanded their ownership in North America and Europe during the 1920s and 1930s . Gars became popular in Europe and North America in the 1930s and
 Japan saw a boom in car production and ownership from 1965 onwards . By the end of the 20th century' China had also increased its car production, from 80,000 cars a year in 1970 to around 1. million .
 Air travel has become the norm for those in the industrialized world . Alongside the marked increase in car ownership, air travel is also becoming the norm .
 In large countries such as the United Stoles, Canada and Russia, people travelling la destinations within Iheit country have increasingly lamed ham roil to air travel .
 Governments, town planners and vehicle manufacturers are being urged to consider these issues when designing new transport networks and developing new models .
 The invention of the radio-telephone in 1902 and subsequent improvements in the quality of transcontinental telephone signals enabled the human voice to travel huge distances .
 Communications satellites allowed signals to be sent up into space and bounced back . This enabled telephone links and live television broadcasts to be made from one side of the world to the other .
 Several hundred active communications satellites now orbit the globe . Without these none of the major developments in communications of the 20th century would have been possible .
 Mass TV ownership enables people worldwide to share programmes . Mass television ownership allows people to watch programmes together . Mass ownership enables sharing of programmes with friends .
 American and British soap operas are shown, for example, dubbed, on Russian television . American and . British soap operaas have been dubbed in Russia . Russian television has dubbed some of the world's most popular shows .
 Major events, such as the football World Cup Finals, are watched simultaneously by hundreds of millions of people . Major events such as World Cup finals will be watched simultaneously .
 For those without access to a television set, the radio often provides a link with the outside world . For those with no access to the internet, radio provides a vital link to the world .
 The Internet has been the most spectacular development in international communication since the 1980s . It gave millions of people in the industrialized world almost instant access to a vast network of information .
 Microprocessor enabled small personal computers to be manufactured from the mid-1970s onwards . Microprocessor was made possible largely through the development of microprocessor .
 By the mid-1980s these machines had become powerful enough for their users to access the Internet, a worldwide computer networking system . By the 1980s, computers were powerful enough to be able to use the Internet .
 First developed in the 1970s for the United States Department of Defense, it was subsequently extended to the academic community, commercial organizations and the general public .
 The technological gap between rich and poor nations is an enormous challenge for those in the process of industrializing . It may also be to their advantage if there is sufficient money to buy the latest technology .
 In China, where until recently few households had a telephone, the old telecommunications technology is being bypassed in favour of the installation of radio masts for mobile telephones .
 All forms of communication require language and there are estimated to be over 5,000 languages in use . Over 5,300 languages are spoken in the world .
 Although there are, of course, benefits to a country having a common language, there are also disadvantages . There are also advantages to having a shared language .
 There has been a sharp decline in the number of different African languages spoken, leading to a disintegration of the cultural values and traditions attached to those languages .
 Cultural integrity is also challenged by developments in global communications, which have provided the most technologically advanced countries with a powerful means of spreading their ideologies and culture . The most advanced countries have given them a powerful way to spread their ideologies, culture .
 The extent of which countries can participate in the ‘global village’ will affect their future prosperity . The extent to which countries . participate in . the "global village" will affect future prosperity.
 There is no question that modes of transportation and communication will continue to evolve at great speeds, but whether they will become universally available remains uncertain .
 Computer technology represents huge profits for the countries involved in producing it . Computer technology has provided businesses and individuals worldwide with enormous benefits .
 It has created a widening social and economic gap between those who have access to it and those who do not . It has also created a wider social divide between those with access and those without .
 English is the most widely used official language in the world . It is partly a result of British influence in the 19th century but more recently because of the domination of U.S. culture .
 In countries such as China and India, where many languages are spoken, it is essential to have a single language in which official communications can be made .
 In applying the basic guidelines outlined below, a commonsense approach has been adopted that allows for deviations where they serve a purpose . The guidelines are outlined below .
 The conventional Anglicized spelling, without accents, is used for large and familiar places (e.g. places) It is also used for places such as New York City, New York, Washington and Washington .
 In keeping with current academic practice in the United States, accents are omitted from the Spanish forms of American-Indian place names dating from before the 16th-century conquest .
 Where a name has changed due to political creed or ownership, this is often reflected in the maps . The maps often reflect the fact that names have been changed in the past .
 St Petersburg is sometimes shown as Petrograd or Leningrad in maps of 20th-century Russia . Strasbourg is spelt Strassburg when it was under German rather than French control .
 If a country was once known by a name that differs from the one it holds at present, this is used . This is used where appropriate, including where appropriate .
 Thailand appears as Siam on many of the maps dating from before 1938 when it adopted its present name . The country was known as Thailand before 1938 .
 Where appropriate, former spelling adopted under Wade-Giles system also appears . However, where appropriate, the former spelling is also used under the system . The former spelling was adopted under the original system .
 Diacritics are generally omitted from names derived from other non-Roman scripts by transliteration notably Arabic and Japanese . For the sake of clarity, diacritic is generally omitted for names from non-Romans .
 The index includes the names of people and events as well as place names . The index is based on the names and events of those who have died in the past .
 Place names are indexed only when the place is associated with a particular event or is marked by a symbol included in the key . To avoid unhelpful references to maps, place names are only indexed when associated with an event .
 References to maps are indicated by maps indicated by italics, as are references to pictures . Maps are indicated in italics .
 The Development of Sedentary and Nomadic Civilizations UNESCO, Paris 1994 Jansen, M and Urban, . Urban, G Mohenjo Daro Vol. Vol. Jansen . Urban .
 Tattersall, I “Out of Africa Again ... and Again?”, in Scientific American Vol. 1 . 1993 Shinnie, P The African Iron Age Clarendon Press, Oxford 1971 Tattersalls, I . “African Iron Age’s”
 Longman, Harlow 1985 Mabogunje, A.L. and Richards, P “The land and peoples of West Africa”, in Ajayi, J.F.A. and Crowder, M History of West African Vol. 1 . History of
 The Growth and Destiny of a Man and of a World-Empire Harvester, Brighton 1980 Braudel, F Civilisation and Capitalism, 15th-18th Centuries Vol. Vol. 1 .
 Hosking, G A History of the Soviet Union Fontana Fontana, London 1992 Keep, J Last of the Empires. An Introductory Survey Macmillan, Basingstoke 1985 Hosking,. G Hosking . Keep, G Keep: Last of The Empires. A History