 On October 16, Kennedy learned that his most serious problem was not Berlin, not the quest for racial justice, but the November election . Shortly afterward, in his office, he told me that a U-2 had just finished a photographic mission and that the Intelligence Community has become convinced that
 U-2 photo on October 14, 1962 confirms construction of ballistic missile sites in San Cristobal, Cuba . U.2 photo shows construction of missile sites on Cuban coast .
 Kennedy was irate that Khrushchev had lied, having told him the Soviets would not put offensive weapons in Cuba and that he would not do anything to disturb the U.S. elections . When Kennedy received this information at the start of the day, he was .
 Top foreign policy and security advisors, Bobby Kennedy, McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk and General Marshall Carter met with the President . Later, at a 11:50 am meeting, the top foreign policy advisers met with President .
 Carter announced that a medium-range ballistic missile, about 65 feet long, had been discovered . Carter announced it was a 65-foot-long long missile .
 The U-2 flights revealed that there were at least 16 Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba near launch pads that were under construction . The U.2 flights also revealed that the missiles were in Cuba .
 The committee agreed that the Soviet missiles needed to be removed, but didn’t decide whether to first seek a military or a diplomatic solution . The committee decided whether to seek military or diplomatic solutions .
 JFK preferred a surgical or general strike to destroy the ballistic missiles . He didn't think they had the two weeks needed to prepare for an invasion .
 He felt he needed to show strength and respond to Khrushchev before Congress learned of the presence of ballistic missiles . He said he felt like he was showing strength and responding before Congress knew of missile threat .
 The State Department, Department of Defense and Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed a surgical strike . The State Dept. of Defense, the Joint chiefs of Staff and the State Department of State opposed a strike .
 For JFK, the missiles were a political concern of equal weight to the military . JFK: "For JFK, missiles were an equal weight" for the military.
 His advisors believed that missiles in Cuba didn’t actually change the military balance . President Obama’s advisors believed missiles in the Cuban Islands didn't change the balance of the US military .
 President Obama had said the U.S. would not allow offensive weapons in Cuba in September . But now, he says inaction now would be seen as weakness . Obama says he's concerned that inaction would be perceived weakness .
 At the conclusion of this first meeting, 11 favored a blockade, 9 wanted a military strike . According to Robert Kennedy, at the . conclusion of the . meeting, at . conclusion, 11 favor a blockade . 9 favor military strike; 11 favor blockade; 9 favor blockade .
 Adlai Stevenson attended a luncheon for Libya’s crown prince that was also attended by UN Ambassador . Kennedy invited Stevenson to the family quarters . The Ex Comm. Favored a Blockade or Military Strike .
 He suggested that before taking military action, the existence of any military base should be negotiable . He also suggested that a military base is also negotable .
 Stevenson followed up with a memo the following day that focused on the role that world opinion would play once the crisis became public . Stevenson: "World opinion will play a key role in the outcome of the crisis"
 The CIA told JFK they believed launch sites were for IRBMs because of their longer launch pads . The CIA said JFK believed the sites would be used for IRBM missiles . Stevenson's memo was published October 18, 1962 .
 Kennedy met with the Joint Chiefs of Staff before traveling to Illinois for campaign appearances . October 19, 1962 .
 Only the Chairman, General Taylor, had been included in Kennedy’s advisory group . General Taylor was only the Chairman of the Advisory Board .
 Kennedy expressed his concern that a U.S. attack on Cuba would lead to the Soviets taking Berlin, and then to use of nuclear force . Kennedy expressed concern that the Soviets could use nuclear force against the United States in Berlin .
 He was concerned that a blockade of Cuba would be met with a Soviet blockade of Berlin . He was also concerned that the blockade would also be met by a Soviet blockage of Berlin.
 The long-held view of the Joint Chiefs had been that an invasion of Cuba was necessary, and that with the discovery of offensive weapons, it was absolutely necessary . The Joint Chiefs' view of Cuba invasion was that an attack was necessary .
 As the President’s preference had evolved to be a blockade, the Chiefs, led by Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay advocated for an air strike on Soviet installations, hoping it would lead to an invasion .
 The Chiefs’ doubt about the success of a blockade, on top of his own, led Kennedy to defer making a decision and to allow his advisors, led by Robert Kennedy, to continue deliberating .
 The Joint Chiefs Wanted an Invasion October 20, 1962 Robert Kennedy asked JFK to return from campaigning . Robert Kennedy was asked to return to campaigning .
 The CIA reported that in addition to the presence of IRBMs in Cuba, 8 MRBMs were now ready to be fired . The CIA also reported that 8 MRBM missiles were ready to fire .
 This fact increased the chance that a U.S. strike on Cuba would be met with a nuclear response … and lead to nuclear war . This fact . increased the chances that a United States strike . on Cuba . would also increase the chances of nuclear war, author says .
 JFK decided to enact a naval blockade and be prepared to undertake an air strike on the missiles and missiles sites . JFK also planned to undertake a naval attack on the missile and missile sites .
 President Kennedy called former President Eisenhower on October 22 morning . Kennedy called Eisenhower on the morning of October 22 . Eisenhower called Kennedy on the day of the day .
 Eisenhower said he thought only a blockade or full-scale invasion of Cuba would work . He said he would support whatever course Kennedy chose to take .
 United States Navy ships evacuated 2,810 women, children and other non-combatants from Guantanamo, taking them to Norfolk, Virginia . U.S. Navy ships took them from Guantanamo and took them to Virginia .
 Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, was called to the office of Secretary of State Dean Rusk and given a copy of the speech .
 In personal letter to Khrushchev, Kennedy warned that the United States was determined that the Soviet threat to the Western hemisphere be removed . Kennedy: U.S. determined to remove Soviet threat from Western hemisphere .
 Dobrynin was surprised as he had not known of the missile deployment, and denied it . He said he did not know of the deployment and that he had been surprised .
 Kennedy announced his plan for a blockade in a televised speech to the nation on October 22 . Kennedy announced the blockade on a televised address to Congress . Kennedy's plan for the blockade was revealed in a nationally televised speech .
 He said the purpose of the limited blockade was to prevent offensive military equipment from being shipped to Cuba . He said it was intended to stop the flow of offensive military gear to the island .
 As Seen By the USSR Oct 22, 1962 Moscow time . I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup… Read the full speech .
 Malinovsky advised calm, saying that the United States was unlikely to strike immediately . He said that it was unlikely the USSR would need to put their missile forces on high alert .
 Khrushchev said their objective was to restrain U.S. actions against Cuba . They did not want a war, he said, but they didn't want it to happen .
 The existing equipment would belong to Cuba, and Cuba would respond to the U.S. invasion . Cuba would use the existing equipment to fight an invasion of the United States .
 The group finally decided to put their troops in Cuba on full alert, to prepare to defend Cuba militarily and if necessary, to used tactical weapons but not nuclear weapons . If necessary, they will be able to use tactical weapons against the situation .
 They decided not to issue orders to the forces on the island until they heard Kennedy’s speech . They decided to wait until the speech was made .
 Presidium relieved when they received a copy of Kennedy’s speech announcing a blockade, not an invasion . USSR turned around ships in response to Kennedy's speech . Presidium was relieved to receive a copy .
 After breaking for sleep, the group reconvened for the first time in Moscow . Oct 23 10:30 a.m. Moscow time .
 General Pliev was ordered to establish a reliable radio connection with Moscow . He was sent to establish the link between Moscow and the Soviet Union .
 There would be no further consideration of allowing Pliev the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons . Pliev would not be allowed to use nuclear weapons, he said .
 Presidium turned around all vessels with weapons to avoid the United States having access to them . Presidium decided to turn around all ships with weapons . U.S. will not be allowed access to the weapons .
 The Aleksandrovsk was ordered to remain on course, as were four Soviet subs armed with nuclear missiles . Despite this agreement, the ship carrying the second load of nuclear warheads remained on course . Four Soviet subs were also ordered to stay on course with nuclear warheads .
 The Presidium ignored Kennedy’s demand for the removal of nuclear weapons . Kennedy ignored the Presidium's demand that nuclear weapons be removed from the country . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 in a bid to remove nuclear weapons from Russia .
 Khrushchev’s reply included a request that the U.S. show prudence and avoid actions that could lead to catastrophic consequences . ‘The United States showed prudence.’
 JFK’s informal group of advisors became the official Executive Committee of the National Security Council, ExComm . ExComm. was JFK's informal advisory group . The committee is now known as ExComm, the White House's Executive Committee .
 They had to decide how to implement the blockade; how they would respond if a U-2 was shot down; what to do if the Soviets took action against West Berlin . They also had to consider how to deal with the U.S. response to a U.2 being shot
 McCone reported that the Soviet missiles were not seen in the latest U-2 photos, possibly due to extensive camouflage . McCone: "The Soviet missiles are not seen" in the new photos .
 The Organization of American States unanimously approved the blockade, allowing the U.S. to formally declare a blockade . The United States formally declared the blockade .
 Robert Kennedy asked Dobrynin what orders captains of ships headed for Cuba had . Kennedy: Captains of ships heading to Cuba had orders to prepare . Kennedy also asked what orders the captains had .
 Dobrynin, who had not known of the missile emplacements, did not know of the ships’ orders . Dobrynins had not been aware of the emplacement of the missiles, but knew of orders .
 Kennedy informed Kennedy that the U.S. intended to stop Soviet ships . Kennedy informed him that the United States wanted to stop the Soviet ships. Kennedy also informed him of the threat .
 As Seen by the USSR October 23, 1962 . Khrushchev’s dilemma – if he allowed the U.S. to inspect his ships in international or Cuban waters, he would look weak, but a military confrontation could well result in the use of nuclear weapons .
 He decided to accelerate ships that could reach Cuba before the blockade and turn back those that could not . He also decided to turn back ships that had already reached Cuba .
 The Aleksandrovsk was routed to the nearest Cuban port, La Isabela, rather than its objective of Mariel as the Soviets had intercepted information that the U.S. was searching for a ship carrying nuclear warheads .
 Soviet Union sought to address the imbalance in nuclear weaponry by installing such weapons in Cuba . The Soviet Union wanted to curb the imbalance of nuclear weaponry in Cuba.
 According to Richard Reeves writing in President Kennedy, the United States had approximately five thousand deliverable nuclear weapons . The U.S. had approximately 5,000 deliverable weapons, according to Reeves .
 United States intelligence estimated that the Soviets had three hundred deliverable weapons . U.S. intelligence estimates that the Soviet Union had more than 3,000 delivered weapons .
 The United States estimate of the number of Soviet intercontinental missiles targeted at the United States was now seventy-five . The U.S. estimate was now that the U.K. estimate .
 Analysts doubted the missiles would even come close to their presumed targets . Analysts say the missiles had relatively primitive guidance systems, and analysts doubted they would hit targets .
 Air defense system of SAMs capable of striking aircraft at 70,000 feet . In addition, they had deployed an air defense system . SAMs can strike aircraft at high altitudes .
 They also had 40 MiG-21 and 6 Mi-15 fighter aircraft, as well as helicopters, gunboats, tanks and artillery . They were also equipped with 40 Mi-21 fighter aircraft and 40 helicopters .