 Obama is about to visit Cuba to visit the Guantanamo Bay prison . Elian Gonzalez is a former Guantanamo Bay prisoner who was held in Guantanamo Bay .
 There are only 90 miles of ocean between the longest dictatorship in the Americas and the longest uninterrupted democracy . Only 90 miles from the longest democracy in the U.S. is between democracy and dictatorship .
 These waters are filled with tears for the disappearance of thousands of Cuban rafters who fled the Castro government and its miseries . This is a narrow sea that divided for many years families, friends and lovers .
 "He took over the media, transforming it into a big public relations machine for the state," he says . "He expropriated all forms of private property during the '60s," he adds .
 Top 10 misleading and outrageous statements from NYT's Nikole Hannah-Jones . Top ten misleading statements from Nikole Hannah-Jones.
 Hannah-Jones promoted Cuba as a country with a ""viable and sufficiently ambitious integration agenda"" due primarily to socialism . Hannah Jones appeared on a podcast with Ezra Klein in 2019, promoting Cuba .
 Hannah-Jones: "And that's largely due to socialism — which I'm sure no one wants to hear,""""That's largely because of socialism," she said .
 In 2008, she boasted that Cuba had a very high literacy rate, a low HIV-infection rate, universal education, and a ""model"" universal health care system that assisted Black Cubans .
 "I came to the United States with my parents from Cuba in 1964. As you may know, I came with my family from Cuba," she said . "I'm not afraid to say goodbye to my family," she added .
 I sympathize with Cubans who want to leave the failed communist state but it should be done in an orderly fashion . In other words, he says, "I sympathize" with Cuban people wanting to leave Cuba .
 It's reminiscent of the Mariel episode 42 years ago when Fidel Castro openly encouraged 100,000 to leave . In fact, it's similar to the 'Mariel' episode 42 .
 The government is sending people north, but using the Mexico corridor to do so . So far, the government has sent people north to the border .
 Fidel Castro jailed political prisoners at a higher rate than Stalin during the Great Terror . Castro jailed and tortured political prisoners in a more severe way than Stalin did . Castro's political prisoners were tortured more often than Stalin's during Great Terror.
 He murdered more Cubans in his first three years in power than Hitler murdered Germans during his first six years . Hitler murdered more than any other dictator in six years than he did in six .
 Fidel Castro shattered — through mass-executions, mass-jailings, mass larceny and exile — virtually every family on the island of Cuba . The Castro family was shattered by mass executions, jailing and exile .
 Many opponents of the Castro regime qualify as the longest-suffering political prisoners in modern history . They suffered prison camps, forced labor and torture chambers for a period three times as long in Fidel Castro's Gulag as Alexander Solzhenitsyn suffered in Stalin's .
 Fidel Castro came closest of anyone in history to starting a worldwide nuclear war . Fidel Castro also came close of anyone starting a nuclear war with the Soviet Union .
 Fidel Castro converted a highly-civilized nation with a higher standard of living than much of Europe and swamped with immigrants into a slum/sewer ravaged by tropical diseases and with the highest suicide rate in the Western hemisphere . Cuba's suicide rate is one of the highest in the
 CIA says most 'Havana Syndrome' cases not caused by a hostile foreign power . CIA: Most cases are caused by 'hostile foreign power' CIA: 'Most cases are not foreign-inflicted'
 CIA has found that most of the 1,000 cases of 'Havana Syndrome' were not caused by actions taken by a hostile foreign power . Most of the cases were caused by the actions of a 'hostile foreign power'
 The agency said that about two dozen cases remain unexplained and they will continue to investigate what caused them . The agency says they are investigating two dozen unexplained cases .
 No physical evidence has yet been found to validate the theory of a directed energy weapon being used on U.S. diplomats . But the upshot is that there is no physical evidence to support the theory .
 Other evidence points in an entirely different direction, one involving the mysteries of the brain . And other evidence points to the mystery of brain .
 "They sit on the United Nations Human Rights Council and violate human rights," says CNN.com's John Defterios.com .
 As Hillel Neuer points out, Cuba's credentials are just what you're looking for for a seat in a human rights group: a 60-year totalitarian regime; bans free speech, association; blocks vital food & medical aid; infiltrates & subverts entire hemisphere .
 Venezuela, another charmer when it comes to respecting its citizens . Venezuela, Venezuela, is a country that has a reputation for respecting citizens .
 President Joe Biden's response to Cuban-Americans' protests was weak, despite widespread support for the protests . President Biden has been criticized for his response to the protests by the Cuban-American community .
 Castro regime responded to the protests with overwhelming violence, opening fire on unarmed protesters, publicly beating individuals believed to be participating in protests . Castro regime allegedly tortured and sexually assaulted those imprisoned .
 Biden met with a Cuban rapper, a former food blogger, and a former staffer for President Barack Obama . Biden also met with Cuban rapper and former White House staffer for Obama .
 Cuba and China have signed a cooperation plan to push forward construction projects under Beijing's controversial overseas infrastructure program, the Belt and Road Initiative . The program has saddled many participating countries with heavy debt loads .
 The agreement implemented a memorandum of understanding the two nations signed in 2018 . Cuba agreed to become a BRI participating nation in 2018 when it agreed to join the BRI .
 The two nations aimed to work together on projects in several key sectors, including communications, education, health and biotechnology, and tourism .
 The Chinese Embassy also stated that a timetable and roadmap had been proposed to implement the projects, without giving details . A timetable and a roadmap were also proposed, the embassy said .
 Christians in Cuba are facing extreme repression and even more severe human rights violations than usual this year . Christians have become an increasingly visible part of the anti-communist movement .
 Cuba experienced some of the largest protests in its history this summer . Cuba has seen some of its biggest protests in the past year .
 An estimated 187,000 people in almost every municipality on the island marched peacefully on that day demanding an end to the communist regime . The march was peaceful and peaceful, with the exception of violence .
 Massive protests again rocked Cuba on November 15, this time led in many cities by priests and nuns . Catholics have increasingly taken on a leadership role in the anti-communist movement .
 Marx called the "vanguard of the proletariat" live like members of a royal court headed by a monarch . Marx called them "the proletariat" Marx said they live as members of the "revolutionary" court .
 Fidel Castro amassed a fortune estimated at between $500 million and $900 million in Cuba . His brother Raul possessed $100 million while his brother Fidel amassed $500m .
 Fidel's son Antonio was photographed vacationing on his yacht in the Aegean in 2015 . He lived in luxury while his countrymen lived on $20 a month . Antonio was seen vacationing in luxury on his luxury yacht in 2015, where he lived on luxury .
 There is speculation as to the net worth of Cuba's current president, Miguel Díaz-Canel . There is also speculation about how much he may amass in the future .
 Marxist disdain for one's people is not the exception — it's the rule for all communist leaders and their families, says Julian Zelizer . Marxist disdain is not an exception, Zelizer says .
 I'm a Hispanic woman whose family fled Communist Cuba in order to give their children a better future . I am a Hispanic . woman whose . family fled . Communist Cuba . Cuba . I'm Hispanic .
 Like so many others, my family fled brutal repression in favor of U.S. freedom and prosperity . Like so others, I'm proud of my family's escape from brutal repression to America .
 Conservative Republican policies are by far best-suited to protect that American freedom for generations to come . Our values of faith, freedom, and family connect with the broader Hispanic community . Conservative Republicans are best suited to protecting American freedom, Republican says .
 Biden has stifled the economic recovery he inherited and reversed policies that were helping Hispanic Americans . Biden has been in office for eight months and has reversed some policies that helped Hispanic Americans.
 He has enabled policies that have sent our cost-of-living skyrocketing, he said . He said: 'He enabled policies to send our cost of living soaring' He said. 'He has enabled . policies that are sending our . cost of-living soaring'
 Biden's total lack of leadership also undermines the cause of freedom around the world . Look no further than 90 miles off our coast, he says .
 The Cuban government makes it illegal to criticize the regime on social media . The move gives the government more tools to punish pro-democracy protesters .
 The decree comes a month after the regime restricted internet access for citizens in an attempt to stifle criticism . It comes after a month of restrictions on internet access .
 Internet access in Cuba has been inconsistent since the protests started on July 11 . Internet access is inconsistent in Cuba since protests started July 11.
 The big demonstrations began four weeks ago, sparked, curiously, by a rap song . They were sparked by the rapper's song, which led them to the protests .
 Marco Rubio, R-Florida, co-sponsored amendment to allow internet access to Cuba . Amendment would require Biden administration to facilitate uncensored access to the internet for the people of Cuba . Rubio and Scott are both Republicans in Florida . Rubio says the amendment is necessary to ensure internet access
 Rubio-Scott amendment would create a deficit-neutral reserve fund in the National Telecommunications and Information Administration . It would build up and deploy existing technology on the island .
 Sen. Robert Menendez, D-N.J., chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, backs Rubio . Sen. Menendez is a Democrat and Sen. Marco Rubio, a Democrat, is a Republican . Rubio has been criticized for his comments .
 The demonstrations that shook Cuba on July 11 will soon be a month old . Cuba's demonstrations will be one month old on July 12 .
 Since then, a Carthaginian peace has descended on the unhappy island, with mass arrests, show trials, and disappearances having the desired effect of suppressing further demonstrations .
 The Biden administration remains paralyzed, with self-doubt appearing to sap its confidence . Biden administration meanwhile remains paralyzed with self doubt .
 The opportunity for real change is being squandered by the government . Which means that, hard as it may be to accept, it's not real change . It's time to accept the opportunity to change is squandering .
 This is a harsh assessment, given the degree of hope the July 11 events unleashed throughout the world that Cubans might get their freedom back . This is the harsh assessment given the hope the events unleashed in Cuba unleashed on July 11 .
 Something real changed on July 11, when thousands saw each other in the streets in some 40 cities from one end of the island to another . Thousands of people took to the streets across the island in 40 cities, from end to end .
 Terror can be used only sporadically, tactically, as in the present cat-and-mouse game . Once a population has an experience of collective fear and loss, terror can't be used sparingly . Terror can only be used as a weapon of war, the author says
 Cuban state media announced the deaths of five generals in just nine days this month . The deaths sparked a wave of discussion and rampant speculation among analysts and exiles .
 Senior military leaders all appear to have died between July 17 and 26 . The senior military leaders are believed to have been killed in the past month .
 Some were serving and others retired, but all had lauded military careers . Some of the men and women served in the U.S. military .
 It is not clear what caused the deaths, and there is no indication they were related . The deaths are not related .
 The deaths of several generals in a short space of time come as the revolutionary vanguard that has led the communist country for six decades hands over power to a new generation .
 On July 11, Cuban citizens rallied in the streets to protest food and medicine shortages . Food shortages and electricity outages led to the protests .
 Cuba is going through its worst economic crisis in decades, along with a resurgence of coronavirus cases . Cuba has been hit by a wave of economic and political turmoil . Cuba is also experiencing an economic crisis, and the health of its citizens is at risk .
 Cuban officials blame the decades-long embargo with the U.S. for the collapse of the economy . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by the years-long economic downturns .
 The internet, basically unavailable until 2008, has only been widely available in Cuba since July 2019 . Since July 2019, the Cuban government began lifting restrictions on internet access . The internet was basically unavailable in Cuba until 2008 .
 Cuba has slowly entered the digital world, with mobile access to the internet becoming available in December 2018 . Since that time, Cuba's mobile internet access has become available in Cuba .
 As Cuba's citizens protested, many pulled out their cellphones to post videos and images across social media platforms . Many of the protesters posted images and videos on social media .
 The Cuban government began immediately blocking access to those platforms . The government has blocked access to the internet .
 This is reminiscent of Arab Spring, when the governments of Egypt, Libya, and Syria shut down the internet to quell the protests . This is similar to the shut down of the internet during the Arab Spring when governments shut it down .
 Other governments in the Arab world were rumored to have arrested and even executed people for things they posted on the internet .
 Minor Arrested for Witnessing Protests Says Police Threatened to Rape Her . Minor arrested for witnessing protests says police threatened to rape her . Minor says she was arrested for witnessing the protests .
 A 17-year-old girl was sentenced to eight months of house arrest for having witnessed protests in Cuba on July 11 . The girl says police forced her to strip naked and threatened to subject her to rape by two large men .
 Gabriela Zequeira Hernández was on her way home from the hairdresser in Havana when she noticed the largest crowd of people she had ever seen in her life . She described the crowd as the largest she'd ever seen when she was in Havana .
 On July 11, Cubans nationwide took to the streets of nearly every major city in the country demanding an end to the communist regime . Cubans were demonstrating against the government in Cuba .
 The protests reportedly attracted thousands of people, the vast majority marching peacefully through main streets and into central plazas calling for the communist regime to step down . The largest nationwide simultaneous simultaneous protest in recent memory .
 He and his ilk are much more heavily influenced by well-known celebrities and others who have spent their lives supporting the Castros . The Castros have a history of supporting each other .
 Jane Fonda, Susan Sarandon, Daniel Ellsberg, Cornel West, Noam Chomsky, Oliver Stone, etc. signatories signed the letter . The signatories were signed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973 .
 Democrats socialize and listen to people with and to whom they socialize, not regular people . But then these are the people with, to whom Democrats socializing and listen, not real people .
 I would wager that the vast majority of them voted for The Hologram and The Cackler, too . The vast majority voted for them, too.
 This is the Elian Gonzalez scandal, except these people won't be treated like heros when they get back . It's the same thing that happened to Gonzalez, but it's not like a hero .
 The U.S. Coast Guard returned 27 Cuban refugees to Cuba on Tuesday . The refugees were caught attempting to navigate to Florida on two separate vessels .
 The slightly over two dozen people are believed to be the first large group of balseros, or rafters, caught attempting to enter the U.S. in this manner since the July 11 protests . The group is believed to have been trying to enter into the United States .
 Thousands of Cubans marched in the streets of dozens of municipalities nationwide and every major city on the island . They were demanding an end to 62 years of communist rule . The Cuban government has been in power for 62 years .
 The protests triggered a wave of state-sponsored violence including public beatings, police opening fire on unarmed civilians, and the imprisonment and threatening of minors . The protests were triggered by the protests against the government .
 Ted Cruz blasts Homeland Security Secretary Alejandro Mayorkas for saying that Cubans who come to the U.S. by sea will be turned away . Thousands of illegal migrants will be released from the southern border, he says .
 Border patrol has released about 50,000 illegal immigrants without a date to appear in court . Only 13% of those released have reported to an ICE office .
 In the past, migrants eligible for release into the U.S. after being caught at the border were assigned court dates . In the previous, migrants were released into the United States .
 Former President Donald Trump reached an agreement with Mexico that required migrants awaiting their court hearings to remain in Mexico instead of the United States . The Biden administration terminated that agreement after that .
 Five high-ranking Cuban generals have passed away under mysterious circumstances over the past ten days . The deaths have been attributed to mysterious circumstances . Cuban military deaths have occurred in the past decade .
 According to Periódico Cubano, Brigadier General Armando Choy Rodríguez passed away on Tuesday . The news outlet seeks to establish a communication bridge between Miami and Havana .
 A Cuban university offers no details on the cause of his death . The university first shared the news with the public with no details .
 Five high-ranking Cuban military leaders die in a 10-day span, Cuban government says . Government has yet to provide causes of death .
 Manuel Eduardo Lastres Pacheco, a former general who had served under Ernesto ""Che"" Guevara during the revolution in the 1950s, died Monday .
 He was a controversial figure in the Cuban military who gave the order in 1996 to shoot down a civilian plane from the Cuban exile group ""Brothers to the Rescue" He was one of the leaders of Cuban exile groups who were behind the shooting of the plane .
 A small group of socialists in defense of the Cuban communist regime attempted to confront a peaceful assembly in support of the rights of Cuban people . Tensions rose in front of the White House Sunday .
 Lilia Gort came from Tampa, Florida, because she wanted freedom for her people in Cuba . Lilia said, "We want freedom for our people"
 AOC Tries To Explain Why She Only Blames The United States Embargo For What's Happening In Cuba . AOC says she only blames the U.S. Embargo for what's happening in Cuba .
 Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and three other House Democrats affiliated with the far-left Democratic Socialists of America have so far remained silent . The DSA appears to back Cuba's communist regime against protesters demanding freedom .
 All four members of the Cuban delegation have yet to speak out about the ongoing protests .
 AOC discovered that Republicans want Cuba's Communist Dictatorship to Fall . AOC says Republicans want the government of Cuba to fall . She says she wants the U.S. to end the Castro regime .
 Regime change in Cuba has enjoyed bipartisan support until the radicalization of the Democrats in recent years . The Democratic Party has been radicalizing the Cuban regime in recent decades .
 Presidents of both parties wanted the murderous, long-winded, weird-bearded communist thug Fidel Castro gone . Fidel Castro was a dictator of the Cuban state of Cuba .
 Kennedy, a Democrat, launched an invasion led by Cuban exiles to topple Castro, in April 1961 . Kennedy launched the invasion in 1961, a year after Castro was overthrown .
 The Bay of Pigs invasion failed and Castro remained in power until he couldn't hold on anymore . Castro passed power sideways to his brother, Raul .
 Castro died a near-billionaire, which was quite a feat for a communist who was supposed to share wealth with the people . Castro died in 2009 at the age of 60 .
 If there remain citizens in America who, because of race or any other reason, are deprived of the benefits and protections of a free society, we should work to bring those benefits of freedom to them . We should also work to help those deprived of freedom of freedom .
 The answer is not to abandon the principles that make us a free country . The answer to the question is to not abandon the principle that makes us free, it's to be free .
 "Those who are the loudest and most aggressive about what is supposedly wrong don't want a free country," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Those who are loudest about what's supposedly wrong are the most aggressive . Those who want to be aggressive don't
 Their complaint is not about absence of freedom, but who has power and who will be in charge and running the show, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "They want to know who will run the show"
 Black Lives Matter's bizarre statement about the civil unrest in Cuba is a joke . Nothing could make this clearer than the recent statement of Black Lives Matters .
 Like all countries that are run by communists, the people there live deprived and oppressed . And, like all those that are . run by . communists, they live deprived, oppressed .
 Democrats, undeterred by the election lessons of 2020, cozied right up to BLM's messaging . Democrats were undeterried by the midterm elections lessons of the 2020 election . Democrats, however, were in full control of the White House .
 The White House says yes, communism is a failed system . It took five days to answer the question, but the White House agreed .
 President Obama has been surprisingly muted in his response to the Cuban protests . Even that admission was like pulling teeth from this president, he said .
 Black Lives Matter released a blistering statement blaming the U.S. for every cruel and inhumane thing that's happened to the Cubans over the last 62 years of oppressive rule . The statement is the latest in a long line of attacks on the United States .
 As the American left argues openly for socialism, it's helpful to keep in mind just how failed policies have failed . Keep in mind how viciously socialists have responded in countries throughout the world .
 Watch the recent protests in Cuba and you will see how regular people feel about the direction the U.S. left wants to take . Watch the Cuban protests to see how people feel .
 Since the communist revolution in 1959, leftists in America have celebrated purported Cuban progress in areas such as health care and education . Since the revolution, leftists have celebrated Cuban progress .
 Cuban government abuses include political executions, arbitrary imprisonments, unfair legal system, and severe limits on freedom of expression, free association, free assembly, free movement, and a free press . Little mention was made in those quarters about the Cuban government's human rights abuses, including political executions .
 The problem with the left's embrace of Cuba's communism is it belies its ultimate lack of regard for those freedoms we, as Americans, hold most dear . The problem is that the left has no respect for the freedoms it holds most dear to Americans .
 Byron Donalds has signed onto a resolution from a fellow Florida Republican, Rep. Donalds . Donalds is a member of the Florida House of Representatives who has signed on to the resolution .
 Donalds says it's critical that the U.S. stand in strong opposition to the violent suppression of mass public protests in Syria . Donalds: It's critical to the United States stand in opposition to violent suppression .
 "There was a 12-year-old kid who was in the crowd at the protests," he says . "Not only did they shut down the internet, but they were like, like, 'There was ... a child who was there," he adds .
 The police, the military police threw him on the ground, hit him with the butt of their gun in the back of his neck, broke his neck . The police officer was hit with a butt of the butt in the . back of their . gun, the . police said .
 "These are the things that are occurring in Cuba right now, today,"" the freshman Florida lawmaker says . The freshman lawmaker says.
 Hannah-Jones is dangerous ideologues who have no problem implementing that same kind of socialism here . Now in 2021, as we see Cubans crying out in the streets against the tyranny of the island nation's regime, it's quite clear that .
 Hannah-Jones talked about the nations she thought had made the greatest strides in terms of fairness and diversity in the world . She also talked about her thoughts of diversity and fairness in America .
 "No doubt the lady whose crowning achievement is propaganda on how evil our country is, wouldn't recognize America as a place of notable equality and diversity"
 She actually claimed that communist Cuba is the most ""equal" place in the west . She also claimed that Cuba was the most "equal" country in the world .
 The Cuban government, media, and professional classes are worried that ossified Communism in Cuba may fall . Yet here we are with protestors against a failed, evil state in the streets of Havana .
 After opening the U.S. southern border to pseudo-political refugees, the Biden Administration is terrified that thousands of real ones might come to Miami . The Biden Administration invited millions to storm into Texas in the fashion it invited millions of real refugees .
 Its immigration policy was entirely utilitarian and hinged only on whether illegal immigration altered the demography of the electorate in the correct way . Immigration policy was strictly utilitarian and only to determine whether it altered demography in the right way .
 This sudden eruption of dissent was caused by a perfect storm of calamities, all of which have revealed the Big Lie of the revolution . The revolution has been revealed by the 'Big Lie' of the Revolution, writes David Cameron .
 Lately, life in Cuba has become more unbearable for just about every Cuban . Life in Cuba is more unbearable than ever for many Cubans, according to Cuban officials .
 The loss of revenue from Venezuela, a collapsed economy, gargantuan foreign debt, and a disastrous sugar harvest, uncontrolled inflation, is a plague that is intensifying in Cuba rather than abating, a crumbling health care system, medication shortages, food shortages, water shortages, electricity black
 Cuba's military junta and many of the world's news outlets are blaming for the current crisis . Never mind the sanctions by the U.S. or the so-called embargo, Cuba's government is blaming the crisis .
 These are inconsequential factors, a decoy skillfully manipulated by the oligarchs in order to distract from their own ineptitude and the congenital defects of the communism they embraced . The oligarchs are skillfully manipulating by the Russian oligarchs .
 Protesters know the ultimate cause of their distress is their lack of freedom in all spheres of life, which is nothing new . These protesters know that they know that freedom is a problem, but it's nothing new.
 Joe Biden's problems are mounting fast, but he doesn't seem to know they're mounting fast . Biden has a history of missteps in the White House . Biden's administration has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Border agents arrested 458,000 illegals in last fiscal year, a 53 percent drop from the previous year . The president's immigration policy has been called 'Stay in Mexico, Amigos'
 So far this fiscal year under Biden's Bienvenidos policy, agents have arrested more than one million illegals with still three more months to go . So far, more than 1 million people have been arrested under the policy .
 Kamala Harris has already been there to straighten things out . The California senator has been in the middle of the border chaos in California .
 Once they're breathing freedom, emigres from there tend to vote Republican . Emigres tend to live in the U.S. and vote for Republicans .
 I Want to See Sanders, Warren, AOC Get on a Raft and Sail to 'Socialist Paradise' Cuba . I want to see Sanders and Warren get on a raft and sail to 'socialist paradise'
 Ted Cruz railed against communists during a speech at Turning Point USA's Student Action Summit on Sunday . Cruz said people only seem to flee communist-run countries for America, not the other way around .
 A group of protesters urging U.S. action to protect the lives of thousands of Cubans who began protesting peacefully against the regime this week . The communist regime has launched a ""civil war"" and ""genocide"" against those seeking freedom, they say .
 Cuba has seen a growing number of peaceful assemblies against the ruling Castro regime in the past decade . The scale of the protests that began Sunday is a dramatic escalation from what the country has experienced in recent memory .
 President Miguel Díaz-Canel, the figurehead of the ruling Castro dynasty, issued an ""order of combat"" on Sunday demanding that civilian ""revolutionaries"" take the streets and violently assault anyone suspected of protesting against the regime .
 The U.S. government can use high-altitude balloons to provide internet access to Cubans, FCC commissioner says . The government can also use high altitudes balloons to connect Cubans to the internet, he says .
 Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis calls on President Joe Biden to restore internet connection to the island . The ruling regime moved to shut it off after the internet was shut down .
 Pro-freedom protests in Cuba are fluid, but the communist dictatorship seems willing to soften its tone . Cuba allows travelers to bring in food and medicines amid the unrest .
 In the United States, Republicans called for the Biden administration to be more active in supporting protesters . The Biden administration has been criticized for not supporting protesters in recent weeks .
 The U.S. and other free nations seem to be condemning the Cuban government's actions . However, the United States seems to be waiting to see what happens next . The Cuban government has been criticized for its actions .
 Cuban Special Forces Thugs Raid The Home Of Protester, Kill him in front of Wife And Children . Wife And children were killed in the raid .
 Ramos Herrería said members of a special forces unit known as the Black Wasps invaded the home of her daughter's longtime friend in Cárdenas, Mexico . Ramos
 Armed men hunted the young woman's husband who had been involved in the protests . She said the armed black-clad men hunted her husband . The young woman said the men were hunting the husband .
 Ramos Herrería: "There is a huge pool of blood in the room" The victim's relatives believe he is dead and the couple has children ages 2 and 12 . The couple has two young children, aged 2-12 .
 Violence comes amid shortages of food and medicine and a lack of access to healthcare for COVID patients who are dying at home . The violence comes amid a shortage of food, medicine and lack of healthcare for those who die there .
 BLM lavishly praised genocidal commie Fidel Castro in resurfaced tweet and blog post . BLM lavished praise on Castro for his role in the Holocaust . BLM also praised the Castro regime in a resurfaced post .
 Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez drew the ire of a former Florida Democratic congresswoman . She suggested that the U.S. is partially responsible for the the the deprivation that has led to civil unrest in Cuba in recent days .
 Black Lives Matter posted a statement Wednesday praising the Cuban government amidst mass anti-communist protests . The statement comes amid mass protests against the government in Cuba .
 The statement, posted to their Instagram and Twitter accounts — blamed the United States for the country's instability . The statement also credited the Cuban regime for granting ""black revolutionaries"" asylum .
 Black Lives Matter blames US, praises Cuban regime, social media erupts . Cuban regime has been accused of stirring violence in recent years .
 Black Lives Matter blasted the U.S. and praised Cuba's government while the island was destabilized by historic protests and violent crackdowns . The group has been criticized for posting a statement that blasted the United States .
 The statement was originally posted on Instagram and later tweeted and retweeted . It blamed the U.S. embargo for the country's instability and credited the Cuban government for historically granting ""Black revolutionaries"" asylum .
 Marco Rubio, R-Florida, was quick to rebuke an initial tweet that linked to the statement . Rubio, a Republican senator, has been criticized for his comments . Rubio's tweet was a response to a tweet from a fellow Republican senator .
 BLM blames 'cruel and inhumane' U.S. embargoes for Cuba unrest . BLM blames "cruel, inhumane" United States embargo on Cuba . BLM: Embargo is a 'humanitarian violation' that should not have happened in Cuba .
 Black Lives Matter has blamed the 'cruel and inhumane' United States for the current unrest in Cuba . The activists praised the Communist regime for harboring a convicted U.S. cop killer and for its 'solidarity'
 The group sparked a furious backlash with the statement . It follows a week of violence on the island and furious protests over food shortages and rising prices .
 BLM shills Cuba's lily-white dictatorship, all the black people protesting across Cuba . Cuba's black people protest across Cuba. BLM shillies Cuba's government .
 Cuban President Miguel Díaz-Canel admitted in a televised address that his government's failures played a role in the protests . The statement came out with some funny timing .
 He had earlier called on ""revolutionaries"" to counter the anti-government protesters . He had called on 'revolutionaries' to counter anti-protesters .
 Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation, Inc.'s tweet echoed Díaz-Canel's early statements that blamed the U.S. embargo for the country's economic devastation . The tweet echoed the statements made by President Díaz Canel .
 Cuba is going through its worst economic crisis in decades . It is also facing a resurgence of coronavirus cases . Cuba is also going through an economic crisis .
 Resignations and calls for ending communist dictatorship are coming fast . Resignation and resignation from communist dictatorship is coming fast, says President Obama .
 It's always a bad sign when the elites start resigning during times of crisis, as if they want to get out early to save their skins . It is always a good sign when elites resigning when times are in crisis, says CNN's John Sutter .
 There's more than one now as Cuba erupts into protests and calls to end the communist dictatorship . The protests are getting to be a pattern, so it's getting to become a pattern .
 Cuba's Deputy Minister of the Interior, Brigadier General Jesús Manuel Burón Tabit, resigns . Tabit is one of the regime's thuggier members, according to a top Cuba expert .
 The Obama cat has the Biden administration's tongue as the Communist thugs carry on in Havana, imprisoning anyone who can get the word out on the open air prison they maintain to support the regime .
 The continued tyranny and immiseration appear to be reaching a breaking point with the protests that have brought the regime back into the news .
 The Chinese government reaffirmed its support for its fellow Communist regime in Cuba on Tuesday . China said it would stand ready to work with Cuba to suppress the new wave of anti-government protests .
 Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian claims U.S. was responsible for creating coronavirus . Coronavirus came from China and has since spread throughout the world .
 Ron DeSantis Providing Leadership on Cuba While Joe Biden Is Missing in Action . Joe Biden is missing in action. Ron DeDeSantis' leadership on Cuba is missing .
 Cuban-Americans in Florida rallying on behalf of their brethren in Cuba . Cuban-American activists have been out in the streets in recent days .
 They've been calling on Florida and the U.S. to help the Cuban people . The Cuban people have been calling for help in Cuba .
 Joe Biden has said that he would ""stand with the Cuban people,"" but it's not clear that he's actually doing anything to back up those words . Joe Biden said he would stand with the people of Cuba .
 Some folks in Florida tried to organize boats to go to Cuba and provide help but the U.S. government was discouraging that . The United States government discouraged that .
 Florida Governor Ron DeSantis met with Cuban-American leaders in a round-table discussion to discuss the deteriorating situation in Cuba . Florida's governor is in the midst of a major overhaul of the Cuban government .
 DeSantis corrected the Biden team for falsely painting the protests in Cuba as a reaction to the pandemic . The Florida governor also corrected the vice presidential candidate for falsely saying the protests were a response to the flu .
 Joe Biden seemed absent in dealing with the protests of the people of Cuba calling for their freedom . Joe Biden has seemed absent from dealing with those protests .
 Biden seemed unwilling to even use the term ""communism"" to describe the regime . Biden said he supported the Cuban people after a delayed response to the Cuban response .
 His team seemed to blame the pandemic and ""mismanagement"" for the problem . Instead, his team seemed like it was the result of a pandemic or a lack of management .
 Biden finally got around to calling communism ""a failed system,"" after being dragged into saying something more . Biden finally called communism a "failed system" today .
 Mayor of Miami, Florida, has called on the U.S. to consider military action to overthrow the Communist regime in Cuba . The mayor of Miami has called for military action even if that means launching airstrikes .
 President Biden highlighted previous U.S. military action in Panama, Kosovo and Pakistan . The former vice president said bin Laden's killing "probably saved thousands" of lives .
 The heavy arm of the Cuban government has been falling on the people protesting the government . But it's also falling on those who have been trying to cover what's going on in the media .
 One person has died during demonstrations in Cuba over food shortages, high prices and other grievances against the government . Demonstrators are protesting food shortages and high prices in Cuba .
 Diubis Laurencio Tejeda, 36, died during a clash on Monday between protesters and police in the Arroyo Naranjo municipality on the outskirts of Havana . The interior ministry says he died during the clash between police and protesters .
 It said an unspecified number of people were arrested and there were some people injured, including some officers . It said the incident happened in the early hours of Monday morning .
 The statement accused demonstrators of vandalising houses, setting fires and damaging power lines . The statement said demonstrators were vandalising power lines and vandalising homes .
 It also alleged they attacked police and civilians with knives, stones and other objects . Police and civilians were allegedly attacked with knives and stones .
 Scores of activists, protesters and journalists, including a reporter for one of Spain's leading newspapers, have been detained . Communist party security forces have been trying to smother Sunday's historic flare-up of dissent .
 Reports of 57 to hundreds of missing or arrested Cubans after Sunday's protest . Cubans were protesting across the island . The protest spanned across Cuba and spanned the country .
 Cuban civilians documented multiple instances of state security agents firing live rounds into crowds and beating protesters with baseball bats and other weapons . State security agents fired live rounds at crowds and beat protesters, according to Cuban civilians .
 Witnesses also documented the use of tear gas and other repressive anti-riot gear . Witnesses say tear gas was used in the anti-protest demonstrations .
 Media and Democrats Remain Silent as Biden Administration Turns Away Asylum Seekers from Cuba . Biden Administration turns away asylum seekers from Cuba as part of its Cuban policy .
 The Democrats and their allies in the media would very much like for you to ignore both . The Democrats want you to focus on the fact that Obama and Hillary Clinton are in the midst of a historic election year .
 Donald Trump had a border plan for the border when he was President, but he had one . He had a plan to build a wall on the border with Mexico .
 Trump administration is cracking down on asylum seekers in the U.S. It's not the first time the administration has stopped asylum seekers from coming to the United States . Instead, it's the last thing the government has done is stop asylum seekers .
 The southern border is in shambles right now as immigrants flood the border . It's difficult to tell the honest asylum seekers and true immigrants from those with nefarious intent .
 The White House has been criticized for trying to defund the government's ability to raise taxes . President Barack Obama's administration has been trying to get rid of the tax code .
 The Biden administration wants you to know that the Trump days are long gone, and it's a new era . Biden administration: "The Biden administration, meanwhile, wants you know that that's not true"
 Alex Mooney, R-W.Va., joins "The Daily Signal Podcast" to talk about what life there is like . Mooney is a Republican in the state of W.Va. Mooney joins the show to discuss what life is like there .
 A civilian plane was shot down by the regime in 1996 when it shot down a civilian plane . We can add this one to the shooting of 1996 when the regime shot down the plane .
 As people march in Cuba, we remember the ones who were killed this week in 1994 . People march around Cuba to remember those who died this week .
 37 men, women, and children were killed by government agents seven miles off the Cuban coast on July 13, 1994 . They were killed as they sought to travel to freedom on board the ""13 de Marzo"" tugboat .
 Eleven of these Cubans were children, ranging in age from five months to 17 years old . Eleven of the children were children .
 Cuba's sudden emergence of widespread protests in Cuba is one of the biggest news stories making the rounds . The protests have taken place in Cuba in recent weeks .
 They were being described as pro-democracy demonstrations calling for the end of the dictatorship that currently controls the country under President Miguel Díaz-Canel . The demonstrations are being called for the government to end the dictatorship .
 People were taking to the streets in more than two dozen cities and numerous smaller towns . People were protesting in several smaller towns and cities across the country .
 Cuba has been hit hard by the recent violence in recent days . But the situation in Cuba is now more subdued than usual in Cuba .
 There are still some sporadic reports of protesters showing up, but the activity appears to be significantly muted compared to Sunday and Monday . The activity has been significantly muted .
 The Díaz-Canel regime has already begun cracking down on the protesters, while still blaming the unrest on the United States . It might be, or at least close to it, because the regime has started cracking down .
 The initial Biden administration response to the mass rallies for freedom in Cuba on Sunday was a disgrace . Biden administration's response to mass rallies in Cuba is a disgrace, he says .
 A senior State Department official tweeted that the administration viewed the protests as merely a result of unhappiness about rising COVID cases/deaths in the island country . The State Department said the protests were merely a response to unhappiness .
 Thousands risked imprisonment or worse for risking their lives to protest against the Communist dictatorship . The slogans were about an end to the communist dictatorship installed in the 1950s . Thousands of people were jailed or imprisoned for their part in the protest .
 The starvation and shortages that have outraged demonstrators are a direct result of the regime's policies and repression . The starvation, shortages are the result of regime's policy and repression, says CNN's John Defterios .
 But that money was largely funneled to the unaccountable and brutal government, not its long-suffering citizens . The money was funneled into an unaccountable, brutal government .
 Democrats start to panic after they realize they've Screwed up in Florida . Democrats panic when they find out they've screwed up in the state .
 Protests in Cuba against the communist regime have provided a test of will in Florida . Protests against the Cuban regime and decades of oppression have produced .
 Democrats have attempted to straddle a line that can't be straddled . Republicans, both in the state and nationally, are always outspoken against the government .
 Tepid denouncements that refuse to name communism as the problem don't play well in a state like Florida . Instead, they distract from other issues and distract to other issues .
 The White House tried to make the unrest about COVID vaccines, which is not only ludicrous but an obvious attempt to bolster their own flailing messaging on the pandemic .
 Other Democrats appropriated the justified protests against a dictatorship in Cuba in order to whine about anti-rioting laws in Florida . Meanwhile, local other Democrats claimed the protests were justified against the Cuban regime .
 Former President Donald Trump is standing behind Cuban protestors in their quest for freedom from Castro's communist regime . Former President Barack Obama is standing by Cuban protestors .
 "Don't forget that Biden and the Democrats campaigned on reversing my very tough stance on Cuba," says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz says Biden and Democrats campaigned for reversing his tough stance .
 "Remember when Obama attended baseball games with Castros while they imprisoned, beat, and killed the Cuban people,"" Trump said Monday afternoon .
 Joe Biden must stand up to the Communist regime or — history will remember . Joe Biden MUST stand up . Biden must do it or history will be remembered .
 Never forget the U.S. left's disgusting love affair with the Castro regime . Never forget that the United States left has a disgusting relationship with Castro .
 It's not easy to run a hideous dictatorship and still have fans and defenders in fashionable quarters, but the Castro dictatorship has managed it all of these decades . Castro dictatorship still has fans in fashionable parts of the world .
 The mass, spontaneous protests that broke out all over the country broke out last weekend are yet another sign that the Cuban government lacks all legitimacy . The mass protests are a sign that Cuba's government lacks legitimacy .
 In Cuba, it is the government versus the people, and lo, all these years, Castro's apologists have been with the government . The government vs. the people in Cuba is a government versus a people, the government says .
 They have romanticized Fidel Castro, the founder father of Cuba's junta . Fidel Castro was the Cuban president of the Cuban government in the 1950s .
 CBS This Morning attempted to blame the Trump administration for Cuba's economy crumbing after decades of the brutal, corrupt communist regime oppressing its people .
 The broadcast urged the Biden administration to appease the authoritarian government by removing sanctions on the dictatorship . The broadcast then urged the Obama administration to remove sanctions .
 CBS This Morning drew criticism from the reasonable when they blamed former President Trump for the plight of Cuban people .
 Mass protests in Eastern Europe in 1989 presaged the fall of the Berlin Wall, and the collapse of Communist rule shortly thereafter . One hopes that this is the beginning of the end for the Castro tyranny .
 Protestors took to the streets ""in cities all around the country"" according to media reports . Protestors were reported to be in cities all over the country .
 There have been credible reports of building unrest among Cubans for several months now . But protests usually require some planning, coordination, and communication .
 Cuba has shut down internet to hinder further protest planning, it is reported . Cuba is reported to have shut down the internet to prevent further protest plans . Cuba's internet shut down to hinder protest planning .
 Cubans know the island's top source of hard currency is the exploitative export of Cuban experts in exchange for euros and dollars . Cuban experts are being exploited by the Cuban government, the government says . The Cuban government has been accused of exploiting Cuban experts .
 Hard cash enriches rulers and bigwigs in the army, which controls up to 80% of the Cuban economy . They're also aware that that hard cash is also important to the rulers and the army .
 The Cuban people lack the most basic necessities, says CNN.com . "And that at the same time the Cuban people are lacking basic necessities," she says . "That at the least basic necessities. And that at least the ... people lack basic necessities"
 Castro's heirs have clumsily attempted to replicate China's Communist model . China allows some free enterprise while maintaining tight controls over macro economics . Castro's heir has tried to replicate the Communist model of China .
 Cuba displays 14 medical facilities on the island . Havana has sent physicians and nurses across the world in exchange for hard cash . Cuba's health care system is among of the world's worst .
 Havana and other cities have erupted in defiant protests by Cubans fed up with living in their perpetually depressed tropical police state . The protests have been like an unwatched pot suddenly violently boiling over, Havana has erupted in defiance .
 The Castroite regime has already reflexively cracked down on the protests with brutality . True to form, the Castroites have already reflexed to crack down .
 Some on the left initially tried to portray this as Cubans being upset over COVID-19 infections and a lack of vaccines . Here in the U.S., some on the right tried to paint this as a problem for Cubans .
 Republicans spotlight Cuba as socialism failure as protests erupt amid historic economic crisis . Cuba's economy has been hit hard by a series of historic economic woes .
 Republicans are pointing to unrest in Cuba as evidence that socialist policies ultimately fail . Despite a trend among far-left Democrats to embrace them, Republicans say they will fail .
 Thousands of Cubans took to the streets in Havana over the weekend to lash out at the worsening conditions in the country under the communist regime . Cuba faces its worst economic crisis in decades as Cuba faces economic crisis .
 Marco Rubio, Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio had strong words against Cuba's system of government . Rubio, Cruz and Rubio spoke out against the Cuban government in a joint statement .
 State Department official describes heroic Cuban protests against the tyrannical communist government as the people expressing their right to peaceful assembly . Rep. Ruben Navarrette said the protests were expressing concern about rising COVID cases/deaths & medicine shortages .
 Dan Crenshaw blasted her, firing, ""Stop playing cover for communists and support the Cuban people. Stop playing cover," he said .
 The Cuban people exercise their right to peaceful assembly to express concern about rising COVID cases/deaths & medicine shortages . Julie Chung, Acting Assistant Secretary for U.S. Department of State's Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs tweeted .
 Sanders loves trashing Republicans but won't condemn truly oppressive Cuban Communists . Sanders is a hypocrite who doesn't condemn Cuba's oppressive Communist Party .
 Bernie Sanders silent on Cuban protesters calling for end of communist regime in Cuba . Sanders often uses Twitter account to disparage policies in the United States and Republican politicians he doesn't like .
 Sanders was silent until Tuesday afternoon on whether he supports Cubans speaking out against the communist regime . Sanders previously defended some of the policies of Cuba's previous communist dictator Fidel Castro, including his literacy program .
 He finally spoke, but only when prompted with a question, and he did not limit his comment to Cuba . He spoke only when asked about Cuba .
 Thousands of Cubans took to the streets on Sunday in a number of cities to protest against human rights abuses, a lack of freedom, and a worsening economic situation in the communist-ruled country .
 Videos appear to show demonstrations in a number of towns and cities, including the capital, Havana, on Sunday . Videos uploaded to social media appear to have been posted on social media .
 Protesters, chanting in Spanish, said they ""weren't afraid"" of the regime led by Miguel Diaz Canel . They said they wanted access to COVID-19 vaccines and end to the regime .
 It comes amid reports of gas, electricity, and vaccine shortages across the Caribbean island nation .
 Socialists in Congress Silent as Cubans Rise Up Against Communist Dictatorship . Socialists are silent as Cuban people rise up against the Communist Party . Cuba has long been a Communist state .
 Protests erupted yesterday in all of Cuba's major cities against the nation's ruling Communist dictatorship following over six decades of oppression . Protests were held in Cuba's capital, Havana, and other major cities .
 Protesters chanted ""freedom,"" ""enough"" and ""unite,"" and demanded the dissolution of their nation's communist dictatorship . Demonstrators chanted "freedom" and "enough"
 Protesters had specific complaints about the nation's food shortages, high prices, and handling of the coronavirus outbreak, which were correctly attributed to their government . Protesters also complained about food shortages and high prices .
 The Biden administration was initially silent on the protests, and only commented that they'd vow to condemn any violence in Cuba . Biden administration initially said they'd condemn the violence, but later said they would condemn it .
 Biden waited until this morning to say that the U.S. stands with the Cuban people . Biden himself waited until today to say he stood with Cuba .
 Cuban President Blames United States for 'Social Unrest' after massive anti-Communist protest . Cuban President blames U.S. for 'social unrest' after Massive anti-communist protests .
 Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel accuses the U.S. of provoking social unrest in his country . Thousands of Cubans took to the streets on Monday to demand an end to the Communist dictatorship .
 He suggested the U.S. is responsible for inflicting economic misery in Cuba by imposing trade sanctions . He suggested that the United States imposed trade sanctions on Cuba .
 The Cuban president also alleged that mercenaries hired by the U.S. intentionally manufactured the anti-government protests to destabilize Cuba . Cuban president: The protests were intentionally manufactured by the United States .
 On Sunday, Cuban citizens took to the streets over a lack of food, medicine, and other necessities under the brutal regime of the Cuban government .
 Social media was flooded with calls for support and several major media outlets took notice of what happened .
 The problem is that this is a moment when the U.S. government should take notice, and it largely seems to have ignored it . The government should be taking notice, but it seems to be ignoring it .
 Marco Rubio and Ron DeSantis release statements, but the party in power was all but silent . The Florida governor is expected to take office in November .
 There's something pretty amazing going on in Cuba today, as we reported here and here . There's been a lot of activity in Cuba this week .
 Thousands of Cubans have taken to the streets in Cuba to protest against the Communist government . Police officers have joined the protesters in the streets, and police have joined in .
 It's something that may not have been seen since 1959, with the massive numbers of people . It's not the first time since 1959 that people have seen such a large number of people since 1959 .
 Massive Demonstrations in Cuba Demanded Freedom, Waving American Flag, Taking on Police . Demonstrators demonstrate in Cuba demanding freedom, waving American Flag .
 Fidel Castro took power in Cuba when he took control of the country . The last time the Cuban government changed hands was when Castro took control .
 There's also another powerful symbol that some are waving — the American flag — to them . The flag is a symbol of freedom .
 Imagine if the folks on our left in this country understood that meaning as well these Cubans do. Imagine if they did, they would have understood it better than the Cubans . The U.S. needs to have a strong voice in Cuba, the Cuban leader says .
 Some activists call it the largest spontaneous popular protest since Fidel Castro took power in 1959 . Protesters openly denounce the regime of Miguel Diaz-Canel . Some activists called it the biggest spontaneous protest since the Castro regime took power .
 Miami mayor leads calls for U.S. intervention in Cuba as thousands take to the streets of Communist-run nation . Miami mayor calls for United States intervention . Thousands of Cubans take to streets of Cuba to protest against Castro regime .
 Thousands of Cubans took to the streets from Havana to Santiago on Sunday chanting 'down with the dictatorship' in the biggest anti-government demonstrations on the Communist-run island in decades .
 The images of protests in Cuba have gone viral on social media . The images prompted officials in the United States to call for an American-led intervention to topple the ruling government .
 Thousands of Cubans marched on Havana's Malecon promenade and elsewhere on the island to protest food shortages and high prices amid the coronavirus crisis . Thousands marched in Havana to protest shortages of food, high prices .
 Thousands of protestors gathered in Havana and towns across the country to protest various government shortcomings . Food shortages, medicine shortages, rising prices, and pandemic restrictions were among them .
 Cuban authorities shut down internet service within the area . Many protestors attempted to film the march, but the internet service was shut down .
 As millions march against communism across Cuba, Biden administration makes an outrageous response . Biden administration responds with outrageous response to Cuba protest .
 Millions of Cubans took to the streets across Cuba shouting ""Freedom"" and ""We are not afraid"" in a collective call to end to the 62-year communist dictatorship .
 It was breathtaking, a thing of beauty, comparable only to Tiananmen or the fall of the Berlin wall . "It was breathtaking," says the author of the book "Bastastian"
 It took unprecedented courage, too — against state goons, secret police, government death squads, and paid thugs — to take action . The U.S. government is responding now like cornered rats, knowing very well their survival is at stake, says President Obama .
 A big general strike has been called today in Cuba . It's too soon to tell if the Cubans have won, but it's too early to tell .
 This was a vast people's repudiation of communism, that brutal system so praised by the U.S. left . But even if they didn't, this was a repudiated of communism .
 Earlier today, demonstrations against Cuba's Communist dictatorship broke out across the island . Demonstrations against the Communist dictatorship break out across Cuba .
 Hundreds of Cubans took to the streets in cities around the country on Sunday to protest food and medicine shortages . Shouting ""Freedom"" and other anti-government slogans, Cubans marched around the streets . Cubans have not seen a similar eruption of discontent in 30 years .
 The Times, though, is pretty much always on the side of government, especially when the government is socialist . The Times is always on government's side, though .
 Cuban Refugee Warns America Is Swallowing The 'Poison Pill' of Communism . Cuban refugee: America is 'swallowing the 'poison pill' of communism .
 The Cuban-American immigrant spoke at the last Republican convention and warned America not to trust the Democrats . He is the son of a Cuban immigrant who speaks at the Republican convention .
 He talked about his family escaping communism and praising America for being the land of the free . He also praised America for its role in helping him escape communism .
 This week, he was interviewed by Lisa Boothe and once again, he sounded the alarm . This week's episode was the latest in a series of stories featuring the president of the country .
 Ted Cruz jabs CNN, suggests Cuban leader Raul Castro should join liberal network . Ted Cruz: "I'm not going to be surprised if I'm going to join CNN. I'm not sure what I'm doing"
 He and his late brother Fidel Castro reigned for six decades, the latter taking power in 1959 following the Cuban Revolution against then-leader Fulgencio Batista . Fidel Castro and his brother Castro ruled Cuba for decades .
 Cruz has often spoken out about the dangers of the communist regime in Cuba . Cruz is the son of a Cuban immigrant and has spoken out against the regime .
 Castro's exit comes as Cuba is experiencing food shortages and financial instability as the COVID-19 pandemic shuttered its tourism industry . Castro's departure comes amid food shortages, financial instability and food shortages .
 Some in the media are treating this as some ""Washington moment,"" or when President Washington decided not to seek a third term in 1796 .
 Raúl Castro knows that this is a good time to get out because the island is facing some difficult times . My guess is that this time of the year is the best time for him to leave the island .
 COVID has hit Cuba hard and cut into tourism, the only thing the island has to bring in dollars . The island's tourism is the only way it has to boost its economy .
 COVID stopped those flights full of tourists, and the economy shrank 11% last year . COVID also stopped COVID flights from the UK's airports . The country's tourism industry shrank by 11% .
 U.S. sanctions have made it more difficult for Cuba's regime . President Trump has made it harder for the Cuban regime to get around Cuba .
 Castro made the announcement Friday in a speech at the opening of the Eighth congress of the ruling party . The 89-year-old Castro is the only one allowed on the island of Cuba .
 Miguel Diaz-Canel is the standard bearer of a younger generation of loyalists who have been pushing an economic opening without touching Cuba's one-party system . But he previously indicated that he favors yielding control to Diaz Canel, who will succeed him as president in 2018 .
 Anyone with half a brain can easily discern the handiwork of Castro, Inc. in the neurological injuries sustained by American and Canadian diplomats in Castrogonia . Americans and Canadians suffered neurological injuries in the attack .
 Most media outlets treat this news story as some kind of impenetrable mystery . Yet, most media outlets keep treating this story as a mystery . The story is still a mystery, but it's not a mystery.
 Castro News Network prefers to refer to the injuries as ""Havana Syndrome" A term invented by Canadians to absolve Castro, Inc. of all responsibility by implying that mass hysteria is involved .
 The article predictably quotes Bernie Sanders' senatorial colleague and fellow Castrophilliac Jeanne Shaheen, who blames Trump for botching the investigation and silently implies that he did so on purpose .
 Biden greases the skids for a quick and easy absolution of Castro, Inc. Anyway, it looks as if Jar-Jar Biden has now greased the skid . The vice president is expected to speak out against Castro .
 Cuban regime has offered safe haven to America's most notorious domestic terrorists . Cuba has a miserable record on human rights, with thousands of political dissidents held in warrantless detention and imprisonment .
 Four are William Guillermo Morales, Victor Manuel Gerena, Charles Lee Hill, and Joanne Deborah Chesimard . Four among them are William . Gerenna, Hill, Morales, Morales and Chesimsard . Hill is the son of Charles Hill .
 Hill, along with two members of the Republic of New Afrika, shot to death a New Mexico state trooper in 1971 on a motor vehicle stop . Hill later hijacked an airliner to Cuba and later hijacked a plane to Cuba .
 Gerena is a fugitive from the 1983 Wells Fargo heist of seven million dollars in Connecticut . He is a member of Los Macheteros, a group that fired a surface-to-air missile at the FBI office in Puerto Rico and engaged in shootouts with agents .
 Secretary of State Mike Pompeo re-designates Cuba as a state sponsor of terrorism . Pompeo cites Cuba's harboring of terrorists, citing its harboring terrorists . U.S. secretary of state Pompeo announced Monday that Cuba is now a state sponsors of terror .
 A government television broadcast in Cuba this week urged citizens to eat guinea pig and other rodents, suggesting rodent meat is more nutritious and sustainable than pork or beef . Cuban outlets report rodent meat more nutritious than pork and beef .
 Castro regime has blamed President Donald Trump for food shortages and failed distribution of government-mandated rations . In recent years, the Castro regime blamed President Trump for shortages .
 The U.S. has imposed significant sanctions on the regime in response to human rights violations against pro-democracy dissidents in the Obama era . These sanctions have targeted elite individuals and military-linked corporations, not sources of food .
 She gleefully starred in and helped produce a tourism commercial to boost the America-hating, terror-sponsoring regime's income . The commercial was produced by the regime to boost its income .
 "Jill Biden in Cuba to study Cuba's achievements in health and education,"" read a headline in Stalinist Cuba's media, Oct. 9 .
 Jill Biden co-produced with communist apparatchiks of her Potemkin tourism commercial to boost the income of Castro's military and secret police . Her frequent escort was a Cuban lady named Josefina Vidal .
 The KGB-trained Vidal was expelled from the U.S. in 2003 for her suspected operational links to Cuban spy Ana Belen Montes . She was responsible for the deepest and most damaging penetration of the United States .
 50-plus governments' coalition that has withdrawn diplomatic recognition from Nicolás Maduro's regime will be dismantled . Presumably that will include the dismantling of the coalition that withdrew diplomatic recognition of the Venezuelan regime .
 A return to Obama's policy means an influx of millions of tourist dollars to the coffers of the repressive communist regime in Havana . The decision comes at a time of growing popular unrest and confrontations with police throughout the island .
 Democrats pretend their political enemies are right-wing extremists . Of course, Democrats like to make fun of anti-communists and pretend they're anti-left .
 Landau's narrative shows that the devices of Cuban communism and the program of the Democrats are virtually the same . Landau: The devices of Cuba communism and Democratic communism are the same.
 Communists are dead set against individual self-expression, but our individualism, as Emi Rivero proved with his own life, is consistent with nature . Emi's own life proved with him, as he proved, that he is consistent in nature .
 We are possessive, selfish, charitable, and capable of sacrifice for a greater good . We are simultaneously possessive and selfish, but can sacrifice for the greater good. We are capable of sacrificing for a better life. We can be possessive but selfish, selfish or selfish, we
 Anti-capitalists protest our nature and believe the government can change it . Anti-capitalistists believe government is able to change nature .
 El Regimen since its inception has been composed of more than those whose last name is Castro . El Regimimim has been made up of more people than those with last name Castro .
 This clique gradually expanded its membership and consolidated its strength over the next decade or so . Under the tutelage and patronage of Fidel Castro, the clique carved out their own private fiefdoms .
 He is the person who touted Cuba's health care system as superior to ours, despite the fact that you have never heard a single person say, ever, "Well, the doctor told me I have cancer" Cuba has never heard any of its citizens say they have cancer .
 Michael Moore tried to sell a whopper of a lie that Cuba — communist, backwater, island prison Cuba — has a better health care system than the U.S. in his 2007 mockumentary Sicko .
 People risk their lives on rickety little homemade rafts to cross shark-infested waters to escape that place . Not to go there to get back surgery, not to get it done . People are risking their lives in shark infested waters .
 Sanders was on the top of the heap in the Democratic presidential race until he made remarks praising Fidel Castro on 60 Minutes .
 The case for socialism is bleaker now than it was even back in Wayland's day or in Owen's day . Wayland and Owen's days are bleaker than they were even before .
 The reason is that by now it has been tried all over the world, and it is a bust . "By now, by now, it has . been tried and failed," says the author of the book .
 A humanitarian bust, and an economic bust — in every respect it is the God that failed. A . humanitarian bust and economic bust, it is a . government bust . A.J. President Barack Obama's administration has been accused of being a 'failed' president .
 Before the Soviet Union fell, the Soviets had turned every country that they controlled into a prison and every economy that they control into a poverty zone . The Soviet Union had turned all of its countries into prisons and poverty zones .
 The young people of Cuba have shiny white teeth and they can read, he claims . Cuba's young people are also able to read, the Cuban president claims .
 Armando Valladares' Against All Hope is a book about the author's existence for decades in a Castro prison for having done nothing wrong . The book is based on the book's author's experience in prison for decades .
 There are dozens of books like this written by brave Cuban freedom fighters . The books were written in Cuba by brave fighters .
 When I turn to thinking about life in a Cuban hellhole today, I am reminded that Bernie Sanders' socialism is no joke . Bernie Sanders is not a joke, he says, but he is a socialist .
 A Yanquí accused of espionage for bringing wider Internet access to a small enclave of Jews in Cuba . A Yáquí is accused of spying on a small Jewish enclave .
 Your guards allow you to dress in normal clothes to greet a congressional delegation of three senators from your home country . Your guards are allowed to dress normal clothes .
 The first two bring you sympathy, conversation, pledges of assistance, and candy . The other two brings you sympathy and conversation, but candy .
 The third sits quietly throughout most of the meeting, and then at the end wonders why everyone talks badly of your jailers . The third sit quietly throughout the meeting and then wonders why .
 I hope this is obvious by now but there is zero conceivable political benefit to soft-pedaling your criticism of Fidel Castro, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "There is zero ... political benefit" to soften-pedaling criticism of Castro .
 Pro-Castro voters in America are like less than 1 percent of the electorate, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Someone in a position of authority in the campaign needs to pull Sanders aside and just give him a script about the 1970s and 1980s and tell him never to deviate from it . Bernie Sanders should be given a script of the '70s and '80s .
 On Sixty Minutes, Sanders defended his affection for Fidel Castro by saying, "But, you know, it's unfair to simply say everything is bad"
 The moral idiocy of suggesting that improving literacy is worth imprisoning and torturing political enemies, and murdering up to 140,000 people, is a big lie .
 The dictatorship, the militarization of society, the paranoia and the paranoia, the surveillance, the secret police, the arbitrary arrests and disappearances for having said something wrong, the closure of newspapers, the lack of the most basic necessities for life, and because Cuba was becoming a Soviet colony
 Democratic presidential candidate for president Sen. Barack Obama praises Castro's Cuba . Sen. Marco Rubio of Cuba praised Castro's Cuban government . Obama has been critical of Castro's government in Cuba .
 Bernie Sanders: "I must take the opportunity to correct the misinformation and false claims so frequently touted by Castro's apologists" Castro apologists. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., says he must correct the false claims .
 Castro regime legacy of firing squads, torture, imprisonment, brutal oppression and terrorism is appalling to those personally affected by the Castro regime . The Castro regime's firing squads and imprisonment were among the crimes committed by Fidel Castro's regime .
 Many of those who support Sanders today may not have been around to witness the evils of communism over the past few decades . Bernie supporters may not be around today to see the horrors of communism in communist countries .
 President Obama and Cuban dictator Raúl Castro attended a baseball game in Havana . Obama and Castro enjoyed a game of baseball in Cuba .
 Bread lines, gas lines, food shortages, crumbling infrastructure, crippling poverty, and crippling poverty . The oppressed people suffering under the jackboot of socialism . The world's oppressed people are suffering under socialism .
 Caravans of Cuban-Americans protest Bernie Sanders and rally for Donald Trump . Cuban-American groups rally in support of the Republican presidential candidate .
 Caravans of Cuban-Americans rallied in support of President Donald Trump on Saturday after Sen. Sen. Marco Rubio lost his seat in Florida .
 Long lines of cars and trucks flying Cuban and American flags and honking their horns . Photos and videos emerged on social media in Miami on Friday .
 Others wore MAGA hats and waved Trump 2020 flags to show their support of the president .
 The Cubans, it turned out, gave Chávez the wrong cancer treatment . They were unable to correct it after they discovered the error .
 Chávez was a victim of the very Castrocare he touted, as Bernie Sanders does now, as a solution to all of Venezuela's ills . That doomed him, he touted Castrocare as the solution to Venezuela's problems . Bernie Sanders now says that Castrocare is the solution
 Venezuela's hospitals now look like Cuba's or, given the lack of water, electricity, and money, probably worse . The hospitals now resemble Cuba's, but are likely to be worse if they don't have enough money and water .
 Castrocare itself, the elites-tier version, is what did Chávez in . But it was Castrocare, the elite-elite version, that did the Venezuelan president in trouble .
 Castro, treated with Western medicine, and Chávez, went down with a treatable illness made untreatable by Castrocare . Castrocare is worth the worth of such a system, Castrocare says .
 Given the opportunity, he keeps lavishing love on a dictator who drove thousands of his country people to exile, slaughtered thousands more . Thousands more slaughtered, imprisoned tens of thousands of people, and drove his country into decades of poverty .
 While he once had a lead in Florida, now Biden is in the lead in the state . Biden is now leading in Florida .
 Cubans are coming out strongly in support of Trump, a man who reinstated the embargo that Obama, the last Democrat president, revoked . Trump is the man who not only does not praise Castro, but who reinstates the embargo .
 Four former Cuban political prisoners have sent a letter to Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez condemning Bernie Sanders for praising the late dictator Fidel Castro . The former political prisoners spent a combined 81 years in prison for their opposition to communism .
 In remarks to 60 Minutes Sunday and in subsequent remarks on Monday, Sanders insisted that it was ""unfair"" to condemn the Castro family's over half-century-long stranglehold over Cuba . Sanders claimed that Fidel Castro imposed a successful ""literacy program"" on the country .
 Bernie Sanders Receives Praise from Cuban Communist Government — Florida Poll Shows Immediate Collapse. Bernie Sanders received praise from the Cuban Communist government . Florida Poll shows Florida Polls show that Bernie Sanders' popularity in the state of Cuba is plummeting .
 The official communist propaganda outlet in Cuba, Granma, is heaping high praise upon Bernie ""Fidel"" Sanders for his support for the communist regime .
 The supposed first-class health care provided in Cuba was a myth . By the time I climbed the steps of the emergency room entrance in San Miguel, Havana, I could already tell that the supposed first class health care .
 Friends told me to dress ""like a Cuban"" and not to speak while inside, since my Argentinean accent would give me away the moment I said hello . Friends also told me not to dress like a Cuban and to keep quiet inside the house .
 A member of the opposition Cuban Patriotic Union party came along to guide me in my journey to the core of communist-style medicine .
 We entered the hospital at 10 p.m. on an ordinary Saturday night in September . It was an ordinary night in the hospital for a family member .
 The scarce equipment available gave the building the appearance of a makeshift medical camp, rather than a hospital in the capital .
 Breadline Bernie Makes It Harder for the Left to Hide its Love Affair with Communism . Bernie Sanders is a socialist, but he's not a socialist . He's a socialist. Bernie Sanders.
 Bernie doubled down on the comments . Bernie Sanders said that he would not apologize for what he said .
 Communist Cuba Praises Bernie Sanders on front page of state-run newspaper . Cuba's Communist Cuba praises Bernie Sanders . State-run Cuban newspaper says Sanders is a socialist .
 Communist Cuba praised socialist Bernie Sanders for his recent praise of the communist nation . Sanders is the front-runner in the race for the Democratic nomination for president .
 Senator Bernard Sanders is the first socialist since Henry Wallace to have a realistic, if long shot, chance of becoming President of the U.S. Senator Bernie Sanders has a realistic chance of winning the White House .
 With his status as frontrunner for the Democratic Presidential nomination secured, following his victory in the Nevada caucus, had come increased scrutiny .
 In an interview with 60 minutes, which aired Sunday evening, Sen. Ted Cruz said he would be a better person to call Sen. Cruz .
 Sanders was asked about some comments he had made in the 1980s about Fidel Castro and his regime . Sanders was also asked about comments he made about the Castro regime .
 We're supposed to believe that it is a wonderful thing in Communist countries where the leaders care so much for their people. But we can't believe that this is a good thing . We are supposed to think it is wonderful thing to see that in Communist nations .
 Abortion is available on demand in Cuba, and in 2019 they raised the mandatory minimum wage . In Cuba, the minimum wage will be raised in 2019 .
 Cuba doesn't have the problem with wealth and income inequality that the U.S. does because that would cause division and strife . Cuba's wealth inequality would cause divisions and strife in the country, the Cuban president says .
 Higher education professors will now receive $56 to $68 per month . Similar to the fake Indian running for President, who wants to move towards socialism, who is worth millions .
 Fidel Castro's net worth has grown over the course of his adult life . One estimate suggests he had an annual income of $150 million . Fidel Castro had a net worth of $100 million .
 He likely had a range of other assets, like vehicles, boats, and valuables, which are part of the total .
 Before his death in November 2016, Fidel Castro's net worth was estimated at $900 million . Fidel Castro was estimated to be worth $900million .
 Certain information about the infamous Cuban leader is hard to come by, but it could have been higher . However, as certain information about his life is scarce, it could be higher .
 Senator Bernie Sanders praised the achievements of communist Cuba on CBS' 60 Minutes . Senator Sanders praised Cuba's achievements .
 In 2016, The Washington Post fact-checker debunked a politician's claim that Castro's rule improved Cuban healthcare and education .
 In Cuba, children are taught by poorly paid teachers in dilapidated schools . In today's Cuba, many children are being taught by poor paid teachers .
 Cuba has made less educational progress than most Latin American countries over the last 60 years . Cuba's educational progress has been slower than most other Latin American nations .
 Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., made waves when he merely reiterated his lifelong warmth toward the viciously evil Cuban communist regime . Sanders is the socialist Democratic presidential front-runner .
 Sanders hasn't merely praised Castro's literacy programs . But, of course, he also praised the Castro program's propagandistic exploits .
 He said that the Cuban people ""had an almost religious affection"" for Castro . The Cuban people had a 'almost religious affection' for Castro, the president said .
 There is hardly a single communist regime of the past half-century for which Sanders has not expressed some level of moral support . Sanders has expressed support for some of the world's communist regimes .
 Cuban Americans share some personal knowledge of Castro's Cuba with Bernie Sanders . Bernie Sanders is a Cuban-American who has been critical of the Castro regime .
 A few Cuban Americans have come forward to offer their personal perspectives as people who actually lived under Castro's regime . Bernie Sanders decided to look at the bright side of the Cuban revolution .
 Cuban memories of Cuban communism are not, primarily, positive tales of expanded literacy . Shockingly, their memories of the country's communist regime are not all positive .
 Sebastian Arcos and family members tried to travel from Cuba to the United States . Authorities stopped them in what turned out to be a sting operation to arrest one of his uncles . He had advocated and fought for Fidel Castro's revolution more than 20 years earlier .
 Arcos was jailed for a year for trying to leave the island nation . That was Dec. 31, 1981, and for leaving, he was sentenced to a year .
 His father was also a political supporter of the communist revolution and was imprisoned for six years . His father, also a citizen of the revolution, was imprisoned in communist-era China .
 The Latino, Cuba, Argentina and Venezuelan community in/around Miami-Dade is the central voting block for democrats . It is proud and loud. The Latino community is a strong and proud voting block .
 There is one issue, one central issue, so encompassing they will walk away . However, there is a central issue that will keep them from walking away .
 The murderous bloodthirsty Cuban dictator Fidel Castro is hated with the blazing sun of a thousand supernovas . Fidel Castro was the dictator of the Cuban state of Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 Voto Latino CEO Mar'a Teresa Kumar said Democrats could 'kiss Florida goodbye' if Sen. Marco Rubio loses his seat in Florida . Kumar: Democrats could kiss Florida goodbye if they don't vote for Rubio .
 Bernie Sanders was the Democrats nominee in the 2020 presidential election . Bernie Sanders is the Democratic presidential candidate for the Democratic Party .
 Florida's Democrats in panic after Bernie Sanders blows a kiss to Castro . Bernie Sanders is a Democrat in Florida, but is not a Democrat .
 Bernie Sanders has always had a soft spot for Fidel Castro and the communist dictatorship the latter created . Bernie Sanders is a strong supporter of the Castro regime in Cuba . Sanders has a long-time admirer of Fidel Castro .
 President Obama praised Cuba's regime for its phony ""literacy"" and ""free"" health care on 60 Minutes .
 President Obama tortured, killed and imprisoned them first, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com/John Sutter . Sutter: "He tortured and killed them first. like that, like that that is likely to cost the Democrats Florida"
 Bernie Sanders Praises Fidel Castro's 'Massive Literacy Program' in '60 Minutes' Interview . Bernie Sanders praised Castro's literacy program in interview with "60 Minutes"
 Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders praised former Cuban dictator Fidel Castro's ""massive literacy program"" during a CBS ""60 Minutes"" clip that aired on Sunday .
 The self-proclaimed democratic socialist points to social welfare programs introduced under Castro's regime that he described as redeeming, despite the communist dictator's often repressive human-rights violations against Cubans .
 Bernie Sanders, who has cemented his position as the 2020 Democratic primary front-runner, is still defending Fidel Castro . Sanders claimed as recently as this weekend that the late communist tyrant was not all that bad .
 Vermont senator says Castro regime had literacy programs in Cuba . Castro regime was known for its literacy programs .
 Anyone who knows anything about Florida politics knows you never, ever defend the regime responsible for why there are so many Cubans in the Sunshine State in the first place . Anyone with a Cuban background knows that you don't defend the Cuban regime .
 Bernie Sanders is the man with the clearest path to the Democratic nomination for president . Yet, here is Bernie Sanders doing exactly that . Bernie Sanders has the best chance to win the Democratic presidential nomination .
 John Alpert is an American photojournalist whose work is featured in the Netflix documentary Cuba and the Cameraman . Alpert's work was featured in a documentary about Cuba and Cuba .
 He first went to the island nation in 1972, a little more than a decade after the Cuban Revolution . He first traveled to Cuba in 1972 .
 Over the next 45 years, Alpert returned to Cuba, each time taking pictures of its towns and cities and people . Alpert took photos of Cuba's towns, cities, and people in Cuba .
 The images chronicle how Castro's socialist revolution played out for the Cuban people in the years that lay ahead . The images he took are a timeline that chronicle the Cuban revolution .
 Alpert was one of the few Americans granted face-to-face meetings with Castro . He was a disarmingly polite young photojournalist at the time, Alpert .
 The Democrats Want to Turn the United States into Cuba; They Should Just Move there. The Democrats want to turn the U.S. into Cuba. They should just move there.
 The Cuban capital has been languishing in the 1950's thanks to Fidel Castro's revolution . The Democrats debate why they don't just hop on a plane and move to Havana, Cuba .
 Most of the old cars are dirty, loud, and don't come close to meeting Obama's emissions standards . Sure, the old vehicles are pretty cool to drive around in .
 The reason why they remain on the roads is not so much because of the U.S. embargo, but because the people working under the Communist regime can't make enough money to pay for a new car .
 In fact, the government owns many of the cars, including those used as taxis and for tours .
 The U.S. special envoy for Venezuela says Maduro has the money to alleviate shortages of food and medicine . He says he has preferred to pay debts to Russia and China and continues sending oil to the Cuban government .
 U.N. General Assembly votes overwhelmingly to condemn American economic embargo of Cuba for 28th year . U.S. criticism of human rights violations in Cuba has been criticized by the United States .
 Trump administration bans United States flights to ALL Cuban cities except Havana in fresh crackdown against regime . U.S. flights to Cuba banned from Havana, other Cuban cities .
 Supporters of the ban say it would starve the Havana government of cash and limit its ability to repress Cubans and support Venezuelan President Nicolas Maduro . The U.S. wants to overthrow Maduro, whom the United States is trying to overthrow .
 Opponents say prohibiting flights would simply make it harder for Cuban-Americans to visit their families outside the capital, without making a significant impact on the Cuban government .
 In Cuba after the collapse of the Soviet Union, fuel was so scarce that many people stopped driving and the government imported thousands of Chinese bicycles . Fuel shortages in Cuba led to the government importing thousands of bicycles .
 The crisis trickled down to nearly every aspect of life, bringing blackouts, food shortages, blackouts . Vitamin deficiency thought to be the cause of a mysterious neurological condition that struck more than 50,000 people .
 Known as the Special Period, that era of hardship and severe rationing began in 1991 . The Special Period was known as the 'Special Period' that ended in 1991.
 Venezuela's decade in power vacuum came to a close at the end of the decade . Oil-rich Venezuela and its leftist leadership came to the rescue in large part .
 Cuba was an ideological fixation for Obama, as it has been for many American leftists for half a century . Then there is Cuba, with which the restoration of relations was a ideological fixation . Obama's Cuba relations with Cuba was also a fixation .
 The embargo was at the very least a point of leverage which Washington held over Havana . A president genuinely interested in human rights and democratic reform on the island would only have lifted it in exchange for at least some concessions from the communist regime .
 The U.S. lifted a variety of other trade sanctions on the Cuban regime . It drastically revised the list of banned officials able to use American financial institutions .
 Other than the release of a captured intelligence asset and an imprisoned American citizen, however, the Obama administration received nothing substantive in return .
 Another trope that ought to have been put to bed by now is the idea that socialism is a workable plan that simply has not been implemented properly . The idea of socialism being implemented properly should be put to sleep by now, says Julian Zelizer .
 Trump admin imposes new travel restrictions on Cuba, banning cruise ships . Trump admin. imposes travel restrictions .
 The United States announced major new restrictions on United States citizens traveling to Cuba on Tuesday . The most common way Americans are able to visit the island is through organized tour groups that license U.S. citizens to travel automatically . The new restrictions also ban United States cruise ships from stopping in the
 Americans can travel to Cuba if it is covered under specific categories, which included organized group travel, known as group people-to-people travel, until Tuesday . However, Americans can't go to Cuba unless it is under specific travel categories .
 CNN's John Sutter visited Cuba last November . He says he is ill-equipped to answer the question at gunpoint . Sutter: "I've realized this is a question I've been asked since November"
 Now I also see an old woman queueing up in a supermarket with a ration book . Now I'm also seeing a woman queuing up in the supermarket with ration books .
 A mother overwhelmed with gratitude because I gave her a packet of wet wipes for her baby . She was overwhelmed by gratitude because she was given wet wipes by a mother .
 A shipment of cocaine worth $90 million was intercepted at the Panama Canal, bound for Turkey . The bust is linked to Cuba, but authorities say it's not related to the country .
 After helping reduce Venezuela to the brink of famine, Cuba is rationing basic foodstuffs . Cuba has been rationing food since it helped reduce the threat of famine .
 Some items, such as chicken, would be limited to a fixed amount per purchase or per customer . She said some items, like chicken, will not be available to customers .
 Other items, including eggs, rice, beans and sausages, would only be available to buy with a ration card . The ration card would be limited to a maximum monthly amount .
 Cuban gay rights activists denounce the government's decision to cancel this year's parade against homophobia . They accuse it of snatching away their main platform at a key moment as the Caribbean nation is set to debate legalizing same-sex marriage .
 The state-run National Center for Sex Education has spearheaded advances in lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights in recent years . It announced on Monday it would not hold its 12th annual conga .
 Venezuela's Maduro was preparing to flee to Cuba but was stopped by Russia, Pompeo says . Pompeo: Russia stopped Venezuela's leader's attempt to flee the country to Cuba . Venezuela's president was traveling to Cuba to meet President Vladimir Putin .
 Venezuelan leader Nicolás Maduro was prepared to leave the country Tuesday and seek asylum in Cuba . But he was stopped by Russia, U.S. officials said . Venezuela's leader was stopped from leaving the country and seeking asylum .
 Cuba, the socialist police state so adored by Obama administration twerps like Ben Rhodes, is finding itself in the line of fire for its brutal grip on Venezuela . Cuba is now in the midst of a crisis in Venezuela .
 President Trump has vowed to make the socialist dictatorship pay by threatening Cuba with 'full and complete' sanctions, which is exactly what it deserves . The president has threatened to make Cuba pay for its 'full' and 'complete' sanctions .
 Trump threatens Cuba with 'full and complete' embargo, 'highest-level sanctions' citing Venezuela role . Trump also threatens 'highest level' sanctions against Cuba .
 President Trump warned he would impose a ""full and complete embargo"" and sanctions on Cuba if its troops do not cease operations in Venezuela . Venezuela plunged into a dramatic televised scene of chaos and violence on Tuesday .
 National Security Adviser John Bolton alleged earlier Tuesday that Cuban troops were keeping Maduro in power in Caracas . Bolton also alleged that Cuban forces are keeping Venezuela's leader in power .
 Cuba arrests Pastor, Wife During Holy Week for Promoting Homeschooling . Pastor, wife arrested for promoting homeschooling during Holy Week . Pastor and wife arrested in Cuba for promoting home schooling .
 Pastor Ramón Rigal and wife Ayda Expósito arrested shortly before they had planned to leave the country . The communist government of Cuba once again arrested Pastor Rigal on Wednesday .
 Rigal and his wife are at the forefront of an Evangelical movement against allowing the regime to educate their children . Rigal's wife is also against the regime's policies .
 Christian Solidarity Worldwide confirmed the arrests Thursday . It did not provide details on what prompted them, according to Diario de Cuba .
 John Bolton Honors the Bay of Pigs Freedom-Fighters, who Obama Apologized for . John Bolton: Obama apologized for his actions . Bolton: "It's a war of honor for freedom fighters"
 "I am delighted to be here in Miami among such brave and distinguished company," says President Obama . "We are proud to be part of the Miami Dolphins," says Obama .
 President Obama apologizes to the terror-sponsoring mass-murderers . But one apology wasn't enough for President Obama, he says .
 The Democrat mayor and a retinue of associated New Orleans city officials spent all of last week in Havana, Cuba . In a way, however, the visit seems appropriate, though .
 The rulers of one place drove out practically all productive residents with punitive socialist policies that converted a once charming and prosperous place into a huge slum except for a few tourism enclaves . After all, the rulers of a once prosperous place turned it into a slum .
 Algeria's longtime socialist strongman, Abdelaziz Bouteflika, was thrown out of power this week . He admits 20 years of what even he admits was failed rule . The longtime strongman admits he has "failed rule"
 He got thrown out the way they all pretty much do, given the predictable-as-sunrise failure of socialism . He was thrown out of the system, but it's a predictable failure .
 He was hardly the worst of them; he just seems to have gotten too old to stay a strongman .
 Bouteflika's exit creates some problems for the Castro dictatorship over in Cuba . What's cool, though, is that it creates big problems for Castro dictatorship .
 Bouteflika was one of their longtime candymen, sending funds to prop up the Cuban regime . He employed Castroite Cuban doctors program, which brought big cash to the regime . Boutefluka was a longtime candyman .
 Cuba would need to spend $2 billion a year for oil if Venezuela stops deliveries . Cuba would be forced to rely on oil from Venezuela for the rest of the year .
 Cuba would have to spend nearly $2 billion a year to meet its domestic oil needs . Venezuela's National Assembly and interim president Juan Guaidó have managed to stop deliveries to the Caribbean island .
 Trump administration allows first lawsuits against Cuba for United States property seized during Castro's revolution . U.S. property seized in Cuba seized during Cuba's revolution was seized in 1959 .
 The U.S. is taking a historic step against the Cuban military and intelligence services controlling that country and propping up Venezuelan strongman Nicolas Maduro . The State Department announced the move on Monday . The move is a historic move against Cuba .
 U.S. citizens will be able to sue some entities whose businesses are built on property seized from them in the aftermath of Fidel Castro's 1959 Communist revolution . The property was seized from the Castro regime in the wake of the Castro-era Cuban revolution .
 Title III of the Libertad Act, also known as the Helms-Burton Act, authorized such lawsuits but has been suspended by successive presidents every six months since it passed in 1996 .
 The embassy in Havana cut its staff in half in 2017 after dozens of people complained of headaches, nausea and other ailments from hearing mysterious, penetrating high-pitched noises . The noises are believed to be an acoustic weapon possibly from the Russians .
 A fresh analysis of an audio recording made by U.S. personnel in Cuba reveals the source of the din is the song of the Indies short-tailed cricket, study says . Anurogryllus celerinictus is known for its song .
 If this explanation had any merit, the deafening effects of these crickets would have been discovered long ago . The deafening effect of the crickets has not been discovered, the author says .
 Cuba has Detained Half a Million Dissidents, Still Starving Prisoners to Death . Cuba has detained half a million dissidents, still starving prisoners to death . Cuba is still starving prisoners to death.
 Rubio said the U.S. should find additional ways to punish Cuba . Rubio said a Canadian diplomat developed the same mysterious health problems that nearly two dozen Americans had . The Canadian government confirmed one of their diplomats had the same health problems .
 Canada is reviewing its diplomatic presence in Cuba after confirming that a staff member was affected . Canada's government confirmed that the staff member is affected .
 Medical tests showed that the person suffered from the same health issues that had affected a dozen other Canadian personnel, spouses, and their children, officials said . Officials said the person was the same person who had suffered the same issues .
 Canadian diplomats allowed to leave Cuba after another employee falls ill . Diplomats allowed to depart Cuba after falling ill in Cuba . Canadian diplomats have been in Cuba for more than a year .
 Canadian diplomats stationed in Cuba are being allowed to return home . Another employee mysteriously fell ill after mysteriously falling ill in Cuba . Canadian diplomats were stationed in the Cuban capital .
 Eight employees and five children have reported unexplained symptoms . Symptoms include headaches, dizziness and trouble concentrating .
 I read the 10,000-word piece, and was struck by all of its amazingly well-reported angles and insights . It included interviews with diplomats who were actually targeted, and accounts from Obama administration officials .
 Former President Barack Obama urges Florida voters to support Democrats to improve the lives of Cuban citizens . Former President Obama urges voters to vote for Democrats in Florida to improve Cuban citizens' lives .
 The former president criticized President Trump for rolling back his efforts to open up communist Cuba during his 2016 visit with Raul Castro . President Trump also criticized President Obama's decision to roll back his Cuba policy .
 Putin's meeting with Cuba's appointed president comes with a $50 million loan for weapons . Putin and Cuba's new president Vladimir Putin met in Moscow on Monday . Putin's visit comes with $50million loan to buy weapons .
 The Russian government has granted Cuba a $50 million loan to buy Russian military equipment . Cuba's handpicked President Miguel Díaz-Canel is scheduled to meet with Vladimir Putin in Moscow .
 The arms deal is to be signed during a series of meetings of the Cuba-Russia Intergovernmental Commission that started Monday . Kommersant reports that the arms deal will be signed .
 The talks would focus on the sale of armored vehicles, helicopters and small arms, sources say . Sources say the talks would also focus on replacement parts for battle tanks . The talks are expected to focus on armored vehicles and helicopters .
 Mysterious attacks on U.S. embassy staffers in Cuba, China came from microwave weapon . Attackers attacked the United States embassy staff in Cuba and China .
 What was thought to be some kind of ""sonic"" weapon turns out to be microwave radiation . Weaponized microwave radiation was weaponized .
 The Accountability Review Board released a ""fact sheet"" to the press on the findings and recommendations . The report was delivered to Congress .
 The ARB process, which Congress established, investigates what happened and issues recommendations aimed at preventing future incidents . Congress established the process to investigate what happened .
 Cuban-Americans from the Historic Exile (those who left between 1959 and 1979) travel to communist Cuba for one primary reason . Those who left Cuba in the 'Historic Exile' do so for a primary reason.
 Castro Brothers turned one of the most successful and advanced countries in Latin America into a totalitarian hellhole with a failed socialist economic model after gaining power in 1959 . The Castro brothers turned one the most . successful country in Latin . America .
 The house where their parents once lived is most likely occupied by strangers who may not want to let them inside . It's most likely that strangers are most likely to want to keep their parents inside .
 After Cuban-Americans emigrated to the U.S. or elsewhere, Cuban authorities confiscated their homes without compensation . Cuban authorities turned them over at greatly subsidized prices to Cubans who stayed behind .
 Cubans fear Cuban-American visitors are there to reclaim their former homes . So there is a great fear shared by these Cubans that they will be reclaiming their homes . Cuban-Americans fear they will reclaim homes .
 "Even if they let them in, they do so with great reservations and never let their guard down," says the author .
 In 1958, Cuba ranked 13th from the top, worldwide with the lowest infant-mortality rate . In 1958 (the year prior to the ""glorious"" revolution, Cuba was 13th in the world with the highest infant mortality rate .
 The pre-Castro Cuba had the 13th lowest infant-mortality rate in the world . This meant that robustly capitalist and immigrant-swamped pre-Cuba had the lowest infant mortality rate . This was despite the fact that the country had the highest infant-murder
 This put her not only at the top in Latin America but atop most of Western Europe . She is ahead of France, Belgium, West Germany, Israel, Japan, Austria, Italy, Spain, and Portugal .
 Today all of these countries leave Communist Cuba in the dust, with much lower infant mortality rates .
 Cuba is ravaged by diseases that had been long-eradicated in pre-Castro Cuba . Of Cuba's ""doctors"" fortunate enough to escape their indentured servitude to the Castro-Family-Plantation, the majority flunk the exam given in the United States
 Cuba's infant mortality rate is kept artificially low by Communist chicanery with statistics and by an appalling abortion rate of 0.71 abortions per live birth . And even plummeting from 13th to 49th in the world, the rate of infant mortality is kept low by the Communist ch
 Cuban scientist sentenced to one year in prison for 'disrespecting' government authority . Cuban scientist was sentenced to a year in jail for 'disloyalty' to Cuban government .
 Cuban biologist Ariel Ruiz Urquiola wanted to start an eco-friendly project on his farm in Viñales, a mountainous region west of Havana . The project is a project on a farm in the mountainous region of Cuba .
 He was sentenced to one year in prison for "disrespecting" officials . His plans were put on hold after he was sentenced for disrespecting officials .
 Ruiz Urquiola's sister: "We will fight tooth and nail" "We are going to fight tooth-nails," she said .
 We've long been told that Cuba's health care system is one of the world's greatest in the world . We've been told it's one of Cuba's greatest health care systems . Cuba has a reputation for its quality of health care .
 Cuba's obvious poverty is offset, at least in part, by amazingly low infant mortality rates and life expectancy . In spite of the fact that health usually correlates with wealth in national statistics, we're assured that life expectancy is higher than life expectancy in Cuba .
 Gilbert Berdine, Vincent Geloso and Benjamin Powell examine some of the ways that the data is being manipulated in Cuba to ensure better-looking health statistics . In a new short article for the journal Health Policy and Planning, they discuss the ways of manipulating the data .
 Doctors have known to redefine dead infants as dead fetuses . For example, doctors have been known to redefined dead babies as fetuses or fetuses.
 The United States has pulled two more of its workers out of Cuba and are testing them for possible brain injury . The U.S. has pulled them out amid concerns they may have been affected by the mysterious health incidents harming diplomats .
 A few years ago, I was in Mexico for Christmas and met a man who flew commercial flights . I met him in Mexico and he told me he was flying commercial flights.
 Many Mexicans refuse to work for ""Cubana,"" the once private airline and now another state company . "Cubana" is now a state-run airline .
 A Canadian friend, who is familiar with Cuba, told me it's the end of tourism . Just yesterday, a Canadian friend said, "Just yesterday, who's familiar with Cuban travel," told CNN.com . The Cuban government is cracking down on tourism .
 "We don't want to politicize a terrible tragedy, and we pray for the families," says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 As U.S.-Cuba relations warmed in recent years, Matilde Portela, a Cuban Airbnb host, reveled in the flood of American tourists . Portela: "Cuba is a nation of people who live in Cuba"
 Cuban-American lawmakers decry State Department decision to grant visas to Cuban artists . Castro-backed Cuban artists are scheduled to appear at the Kennedy Center . Cuban-Americans decry the decision .
 They are also asking Secretary of State Mike Pompeo to consider denying the visas before the two-week festival begins on May 8 .
 "From the Island to the World"" is an extension of the Cuban government's propaganda machine, lawmakers argue . Lawmakers say the show's apologists are apologists for the Castro regime . The show is a continuation of the government propaganda machine .
 Cuban President Raul Castro steps down in favor of Cuban President Miguel Diaz-Canel . Kim Jong-il kicked the bucket before his son fully took over the reins of the North Korean regime .
 Much of the vital day-to-day functions of the Stalinist regime will remain in the hands of Raul Castro's son . Alejandro Castro-Espin is a KGB-trained colonel in Cuba's secret police and fanatical Stalinist .
 The Los Angeles Times demanded that as Castro era ""ends"" in Cuba, so should the U.S. embargo be lifted . As Castro era "ends" in Cuba it should also be lifted, says the Times .
 Buzzfeed provided a romanticized photo spread . NPR followed hopefully, and Buzzfeed followed .
 Cuba is currently undergoing a transformation that will define its future, says CNN.com . Cuba is undergoing an important transformation, says the country's president .
 Cuba isn't changing, and U.S. policymakers and media shouldn't be so naïve and optimistic about it, says CNN's John Sutter . Cuba is not changing, he says, but it's not changing .
 Don't Recognize Cuba's Next Leader as Legitimate, Florida GOPs Urge Trump . Don't recognize Cuba's next leader as legitimate, Florida Republicans say .
 Florida Republicans are urging President Trump to not recognize the next strongman in Cuba as legitimate after Raul Castro steps down on April 19 . Florida Republicans want the next Cuban strongman to be recognized as legitimate .
 Castro, 86, announced in December that he would resign due to health issues . Castro announced he would step down from the post in December . Castro, who is 86, said he will step down as governor of Cuba .
 He first became acting president in 2006 when his brother Fidel was ailing . Fidel was acting president when he was in the care of Fidel Castro .
 National Assembly of People's Power elections will be held this Sunday . Lawmakers will pick the next president of Cuba . Cuba's new president will be chosen by lawmakers .
 Study Offers Simple Explanation for 'Sonic Attacks' That Injured 24 American Diplomats In Cuba . 24 American diplomats were injured in the 'sonic attacks'
 A new report offers a simple and compelling explanation for what may have caused the attacks in Havana, Cuba . 24 U.S. embassy workers and their families were left with neurological damage after the attacks .
 American diplomats reported in September 2017 that they and their spouses were subjected to agonizing sounds while staying in a Havana hotel . American diplomats said they had been subjected to the sounds while in the hotel .
 The victims were left with ""brain abnormalities,"" including ""hearing, vision balance and memory damage,"" The Associated Press reports .
 Initial reaction was that Cuba was responsible for the mysterious sounds . The initial reaction was to blame Cuba for the sounds .
 United States officials believed Cuba utilized a ""covert sonic weapon"" against the American diplomats, The Washington Post reported . The U.S. believes Cuba used a sonic weapon against diplomats .
 U.S. diplomats in Cuba have been sickened by mysterious illness in Cuba . Diplomats in Cuba say they have been infected with a mysterious illness . Cuba says it is investigating what caused the illness .
 Mystery illness rippled through the US embassy in Cuba in late 2016 . Diplomatic fallout was rapid .
 At least 24 American staff and family reported headaches, dizziness, eyesight, hearing, sleep and concentration problems . The U.S. diplomats reported a mix of headaches and dizziness in Havana .
 Many diplomats said their illness came on after hearing strange noises in their homes or hotel rooms . Many of the affected diplomats said they heard strange noises .
 The sounds ranged from grinding to cicada-like to buffeting caused by an open car window . Some people reported that the sounds appeared to be directed at them .
 There are still no indications of what may have caused the diplomats' mysterious symptoms .
 Since 2010 64 hospitals have been closed, the country has lost a third of its hospitalization capacity . Many surgeries are not performed due to a lack of surgeons, or that necessary to operate . Doctors are abandoning their profession to sell crafts, or become drivers .
 This is not the start of a story about a country in sub-Saharan Africa, but rather a "medical powerhouse,"" as Castroism portrayed Cuba to the world . Castroism is an achievement purportedly resulting from its Marxist-Leninist revolution . Cuba is now a medical powerhouse .
 Orlando Zapata-Tamayo was murdered four years ago by the Castroites . The Castroites murdered black human rights activist Orlando Zapat-Tamayso .
 This black Cuban had endured an 83-day hunger strike seeking to alert the world to the Castro regime's cowardly Stalinism and racism . The hunger strike was an attempt to raise awareness of Castro's racist regime .
 A series of savage beatings by his Communist jailers finished him off . He was beaten to death by a series of brutal beatings in prison .
 The United States media was no more revelatory of his death than they'd been of his jailing or hunger strike . Naturally, the U.S. media was not more interested in his death .
 Nineteen American citizens have reported symptoms similar to those suffered by U.S. diplomats in Cuba . The symptoms are similar to that of those of diplomats who had been identified as victims of alleged attacks .
 There are always long waiting lines and you will almost never find a specialist, so you will need to return constantly until there is one . They will ask you questions and fill out paperwork, without listening or paying attention, and will give you a referral .
 President Trump should further unwind President Obama's directives on Cuba, experts say . A panel of Cuban and diplomatic experts told Congress last week that the communist nation should be designated a state sponsor of terrorism .
 Bush Otto Reich, Heritage Foundation analyst Ana Quintana and Jaime Suchlicki discuss Cuba's role in Cuba . The Cuban Studies Institute and Heritage Foundation analysts weigh in .
 Quintana argued that Cuba never met the standard to be removed from the State Department list in the first place . Quintana: Cuba never had to meet the standards to get on the list .
 Cuba Knows truth about Sonic Attacks, Rubio says after Flake Dismissal . Rubio: Cuba knows truth about sonic attacks, Rubio said .
 There is no doubt that the Cuban government conducted or was aware of the 2017 sonic attacks on U.S. diplomats in Havana, Sen. Marco Rubio says .
 At least 24 U.S. diplomats or their family members were injured in separate incidents year . Investigators have pointed to the use of sophisticated acoustic-attack gear .
 Injuries and symptoms included concussions, hearing loss and dizziness . Injuries could include concussions and hearing loss, dizziness and concussion .
 Officials testified before Congress that some Americans are treated for traumatic brain injuries and concussions . Some Americans have been treated for brain injuries, concussions, officials testified .
 The gifts included more than $2,000 worth of cigars, rum and other famous consumer products from Cuban government .
 Cuba gave the gifts after Obama attempted to ease tensions with the communist regime . The gifts included the easing of the U.S. ban on imported Cuban liquor and tobacco .
 The tobacco and liquor were accompanied by a carved wooden bust of Abraham Lincoln . The bust was accompanied by the tobacco, liquor and liquor .
 Newly disclosed documents reveal Canadian officials were calling incidents affecting American diplomats in Havana, Cuba, ""attacks"" as far back as April 26 . U.S. State Department first publicly acknowledged them as such months before the State Department acknowledged them .
 Canadian victims reported symptoms including nausea, dizziness, nausea, hearing loss, nosebleeds, cognitive functions including loss of short term memory . At least 24 Americans in Havana suffered similar symptoms .
 Cuba's Castro dictatorship beats and arrests dissident artists . The Castro dictatorship is known for its brutal crackdown on dissidents .
 Cuban dissident artists were violently arrested yesterday as they tried to attend an event at an independent art gallery . At least six Cuban artists were arrested yesterday .
 Witnesses say Cuban State Security used extreme force during the arrests . Witnesses say State Security sent a large amount of agents and vehicles to detain the artists .
 Among the artists arrested were Tania Bruguera, Iris Ruiz, Adonis Milan, Amaury Pacheco, and Yanelis Nuñez . The artists were arrested and later released .
 Dissident artists Lia Villares and Luis Manuel Otero, however, remain imprisoned . They are still imprisoned in Spain .
 Both are part of the CubaDecide organization calling for free and fair elections in Cuba . Both are calling for a free election .
 Artists were attending a presentation of British playwright Sarah Kane's Psychosis . The artists were attending the presentation of the play .
 The island slave plantation where 11-million Cubans have been held captive by the same totalitarian dictatorship for nearly 60 years is irresistible allure to them . Cubans are being held captive in Cuba by the communist regime .
 "They love to see how people struggling to survive in a closed society will so eagerly and happily dance and sing for them for just a couple of bucks," the singer says .
 Cuba's Castro dictatorship has trapped Cuba in a 1950s time capsule . The Castro regime has trapped the island nation in a time capsule, Cuban citizens say . They adore how the Castro dictatorship is trapped in Cuba .
 Old American cars are thrilled to watch old American cars rumble past dilapidated buildings down potholed streets . None of these roads have been maintained or repaired since 1958 .
 They come for the day to take pictures of the human animals in their natural surroundings like they were visiting a zoo . Thank God they are so much more superior to these quaint yet wild natives .
 Cuban tourists enjoy meals and drinks that cost more than what an average Cuban makes in an entire year . When they are done, they board their air-conditioned tour buses and head back to their all-inclusive resorts .
 Until a few years ago the concept ""human rights"" was frowned upon by Cuba's ruling party . The concept of human rights has been frowned upon in Cuba's political circles .
 Dec. 10 is the day that celebrates the United Nations' adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . The island's government has since adopted language alluding to this concept .
 In the last decade, the authorities have filled the official media and the squares of the country with slogans alluding to all the rights allegedly enjoyed by Cubans . Cubans have been denied rights in the past decade .
 In those avalanches of benefits the collective rights are always mentioned, while the individual ones are ignored . In those avalanche of benefits, individual rights are often mentioned, but not individual ones . In this case, the individual rights of individual people are ignored.
 Cuban dictator Raul Castro was handed the reins of power in 2006 by his brother Fidel Castro . Raul would lead the communist nation into a new era of substantial political and economic reforms .
 More than a decade later and a year after the death of Fidel, all we have seen are a few ""reforms"" that are nothing more than cosmetic, says Fidel Castro .
 Cuba remains a totalitarian hellhole with no civil liberties, no respect for the rule of law, no real free enterprise, and state-run economy under the complete control of the military .
 When Raul ""resigns"" from his post early next year, we will begin to see major economic and political reforms on the island . Those same ""Cuba Experts"" are now telling us that when . Raul is retiring, we can expect major reforms in Cuba next year
 For the Cuban people, however, these ""Cuba Expert"" predictions have about as much chance of becoming reality as their prior predictions . For the Cubans, these "expert's predictions" are not likely to become reality .
 Brain abnormalities have been found in the U.S. diplomats who were victims of suspected attacks at the United States Embassy in Cuba, a new report says .
 Doctors discovered that white matter in the brains of Embassy workers had ""developed changes,"" The Associated Press reported . White matter in brains of embassy workers had developed changes .
 At least 24 U.S. Embassy officials in Cuba had reported hearing loud, grating noises before experiencing ear issues, hearing loss, dizziness, headache, fatigue, cognitive issues and difficulty sleeping .
 Some victims knew immediately that the attack was affecting their bodies, while others developed physical symptoms within 24 hours of the attack .
 There is frightening new evidence to suggest the Cuban sonic attacks are real . The attacks are believed to have been carried out in Cuba .
 Cuban government says high-pitched whirring sounds reported by U.S. Embassy staff are just cicadas . State Department and FBI officials have never seen anything like this . Cuba's claim that the sounds are just a cicada seems almost plausible .
 Doctors treating victims of the attacks have now found visible, perceptible damage to patients' brains . This is the first solid evidence that the sophisticated weapon described by embassy staff is entirely real, the AP reports .
 The futuristic attacks began last fall when U.S. diplomats abruptly started to lose their hearing . United States diplomats abruptly lost their hearing last fall .
 The United States pulled approximately 60 percent of its staff off the island as a safety precaution . The U.S. pulled about 60 per cent of staff from the island of Cuba .
 Fidel fabricated a biography for him to turn him into his shield bearer . He may have seemed a mediocre person to Fidel, without savvy and without charisma, but he was loyal . Loyalty is a virtue that paranoid people value far above all the others .
 Made him vice president, and finally bequeathed to him the power, initiating the Castro dynasty . Castro was made president of Cuba in 1961 .
 A group of Cuban exiles and former political prisoners gathered on Capitol Hill to recount human rights abuses . They recount abuses that they and their relatives suffered at the hands of the Castro regime .
 Survivors tell gripping stories about friends and family who were imprisoned, tortured, and killed for resisting communist rule in Havana . The hearing was organized by Freedom House and the Justice Cuba International Commission .
 Cuba did not have an organized social democratic party but did have populists students and nationalist groups that were resisting the Machado dictatorship . Students and nationalists were resisting Machado's dictatorship .
 Gerardo Machado seized power over all political parties in 1927 and became Cuba's first dictator . Machado was a brigadier general in the war of independence and later a businessman . He was elected president of Cuba in 1924 but seized power in 1927 .
 At a critical moment in the struggle against Machado when populists and students called for a general strike, it was the communists who broke the strike and sought an accommodation with the Cuban tyrant .
 President Obama removed asylum protections from Cubans who reach U.S. soil . Days before President Obama left office, he removed the asylum protections . Obama removed the protections before leaving office .
 This was a strange contrast from the rest of the administration's efforts, which seemed to support granting asylum to any individual who enters the U.S. by illegal means . The administration has been criticized for its stance on asylum .
 Now, the Trump Administration is left with the job of cleaning up the confusion and fraud the Obama Administration propelled . The Trump Administration has been left with a job to clean up the fraud and confusion .
 Attorney General Jeff Sessions is taking a leading role in combatting asylum fraud . Sessions is leading efforts to limit the number of asylum seekers entering the U.S.
 This is not because these men do not want these people in our country, but because the system was expanded so significantly under the Obama Administration, agencies can no longer handle the load and maintain security . This is because of the system expanding so much that agencies are unable to handle the burden .
 Castro dictatorship bans dissidents and independent journalists from international travel . Castro dictatorship banned dissidents from traveling abroad . Castro regime was founded in 1961 .
 Independent journalist and writer Víctor Manuel Domínguez was prevented from leaving Cuba for the second time this year . The regime in Cuba prevented him from leaving the country for the first time since April .
 Domínguez: "I've committed no crime, but am being kept here because they say that I'm a counterrevolutionary" He had previously been denied from leaving the country on July 15 .
 So far, 22 American diplomats and their family members have been harmed in unexplained attacks in Cuba . The attacks are believed to be related to attacks on U.S. diplomats in Havana .
 His crusade to restore relations with the communist country was misplaced at best, a national security threat at worst . His personal crusade was misplaced, he said, but national security is at risk .
 A new recording has surfaced that seems to link high-pitched, cricket-like sounds from Havana to the sickening of U.S. Embassy workers . The sounds are similar to the sounds of a cricket sound from Havana .
 The Cuban Affair by Nelson DeMille is a realistic portrayal within an action-packed story . The Cuban affair is a real portrayal of a real-life affair within a story .
 He has created a novel surrounding accurately portrayed facts . The novel is based on the experiences of his life .
 President Obama did the wave during a baseball game during a visit to Cuba . The wave makes it appear that this is a fun-loving Caribbean island .
 First recording emerges of high-pitched 'sonic weapon' linked to attacks on U.S. Embassy workers in Cuba . First recording emerged of high pitched sounds linked to the attacks on US Embassy workers .
 The first public recording of high-pitched, cricket-like sounds out of Havana could be linked to the attacks on U.S. Embassy workers, a new report says .
 The recording is reportedly one of several from Havana that first led investigators to believe a sonic weapon was involved . The recording, first released by the Associated Press, was first released Thursday . It reportedly is one of many Havana recordings that investigators believe were made from Havana .
 Of Americans affected in Cuba, not all of them reportedly heard the sounds . Not all of the sounds were heard by Americans affected .
 Some people who heard the recording say it's consistent with what they heard . But some who did said, while not identical, that the recording was relatively consistent with .
 Thousands of Cuban doctors work abroad under contracts with the Cuban authorities . Thousands of Cubans are employed as doctors in Cuba .
 Countries like Brazil pay the island's Communist government millions of dollars a month to provide the medical services . Cuba's doctors are Cuba's most valuable export, making doctors Cuba's biggest export .
 A growing number of doctors in Brazil have begun to rebel against the government . Doctors get a small cut of that money, and a growing number have started to rebel .
 The Trump administration will expel almost two-thirds of Cuba's diplomatic corps in the United States . A series of mysterious attacks have affected at least 25 American personnel in Havana, Cuba, according to a report .
 The State Department has not censured Cuba over the acoustic attacks by the still unknown device or weapon . Cuba has not been censured by the State Department .
 Diplomats have complained of hearing loss and cognitive issues from diplomats and their families . Many of their staff have been withdrawn from the country and issued a travel warning .
 US 'doesn't believe Cuba is responsible' for mysterious sonic attacks on American diplomats in Havana . U.S. diplomats have been attacked by mysterious sonic devices in Havana, Cuba . US diplomats say they were attacked by 'sonic weapons' that sounded like a drill drill .
 There is no word yet as to who the Americans believe is responsible for the attacks . No word yet on who the U.S. believes is responsible .
 Robert Mugabe has been a client of Castro, Inc. ever since he assumed power in 1980 . The 93-year-old dictator has been in contact with Castro since 1980 .
 Castro, Inc. cranks out ""doctors"" from its lousy medical schools faster than bullets from a machine gun . Castro's "doctors" come from poor medical schools, he says . Castro: "Doctors" from lousy schools are better than machine guns .
 It seems that its supply of slave doctors is nearly infinite, given how many of them are constantly being shipped abroad . In fact, it seems that the slave doctors are nearly infinite .
 The television report from this town has offered no information about future plans for storm victims . It offers no information on where they will sleep, what they will eat, how they will rebuild their homes .
 Cuba was slammed by Hurricane Irma and Cubans have been protesting the failure of the government to give them any assistance . Tens of thousands of them lost their shambling homes and all their meager possessions and threw them out .
 It didn't take much to blow that shambling rattrap of a city over -and Irma was a monster . Hurricane Katrina was a 'monster' for the city .
 These injuries range from some permanent loss of hearing to brain trauma rising to the level of concussion . These injuries include some permanent hearing loss or brain trauma .
 President Obama's decision to normalize relations with Cuba led to attacks in Cuba . Obama lifted sanctions against Cuba and normalized relations with the communist country .
 At least 16 U.S. Embassy employees in Cuba suffered symptoms from an attack with a sonic device . The State Department confirmed today that at least 16 United States Embassy employees suffered symptoms .
 The State Department said Americans serving at the U.S. embassy in Havana had experienced physical symptoms caused by unspecified "incidents" starting as far back as late 2016 . Americans serving in Havana have experienced symptoms of unspecified incidents .
 Several colleagues at the U.S. embassy in Havana were evacuated back to the United States for hearing problems and other symptoms . A United States government official said in August that several colleagues were evacuated from Havana for hearing issues .
 Some subsequently got hearing aids, an official says . Some subsequently received hearing aids . The official says some of the hearing aids were later given to the public .
 Some U.S. diplomats in Cuba diagnosed with serious health conditions, medical records show . Diplomats in Cuba have serious health problems, medical reports show . Some diplomats have serious conditions, according to records .
 Medical records reviewed exclusively by CBS News show diplomats with conditions as serious as mild traumatic brain injury . Diplomats working in Havana were diagnosed with likely damage to the central nervous system .
 Diplomats complained about symptoms ranging from hearing loss and nausea to headaches and balance disorders . The State Department said the symptoms began affecting them beginning in late 2016 .
 A source familiar with these incidents says officials are investigating whether diplomats were targets of a type of sonic attack directed at their homes . The Cuban government provided the devices to the diplomats, the source says .
 The source says reports of more attacks affecting U.S. embassy workers on the island continue . Reports of attacks continue to be reported .
 The number of U.S. government personnel targeted by a mysterious illness in Cuba last year is greater than the Trump administration has publicly acknowledged, officials say . The Obama administration may have misled Congress about the full scope and nature of the attack, officials told the Washington Free Beacon .
 Six Americans were struck by a mystery illness believed to be caused by a covert sonic device . Many think it was a clandestine operation targeting U.S. personnel stationed in communist country .
 The number of Americans impacted is greater than previously disclosed, according to multiple U.S. officials . Those suffering from symptoms of sonic damage appears to be more than 10, officials say .
 Cuba's assault on U.S. diplomats proves the foolishness of Obama's outreach to Cuba . Cuba's attack on United States diplomats proves that Obama outreach is foolishness .
 Several U.S. diplomats have come home from Havana after losing their hearing . They are victims of a sonic device placed in or near their Cuban residences .
 Key House and Senate committees want to know why they were caught flat-footed by media reports of incidents in Cuba late last year . U.S. diplomats were left ill and reportedly suffering from hearing loss attributed to covert sonic devices .
 Members of Congress have requested a classified State Department briefing, aide says . One is scheduled for Monday for staffers only because members of Congress are on their recess .
 Lawmakers want to know why the Trump administration has waited so long to say anything about the incidents in Cuba . The State Department has acknowledged first began at the end of last year, and the Obama administration also remained silent .
 Trump in late May expelled two Cuban diplomats from the Cuban embassy in Washington . The move was in response to the incidents against the United States diplomats in Havana .
 U.S. diplomats in Cuba blamed on 'covert sonic device' planted in earshot of their homes . Severe hearing loss of United States diplomats blamed on sonic device .
 The two-year-old US diplomatic relationship with Cuba was roiled Wednesday by what U.S. officials say was a string of bizarre incidents . The incidents left a group of American diplomats with severe hearing loss attributed to a covert sonic device .
 The State Department has expelled two Cuban diplomats from the United States over safety concerns of American officials . The U.S. State Department is investigating the hearing loss incidents and has launched an investigation .
 Investigators are looking into the possibility that a third country such as Russia may have carried out the attacks . Officials say the incidents may have been carried out without the knowledge of Cuba's formal chain of command .
 American tourists have joined the millions of other foreign tourists flooding apartheid Cuba this year with their cash and their radical notions of freedom .
 President Obama and proponents of lifting sanctions against the corrupt and brutally repressive Castro regime lifted sanctions . This was supposed to make the Cuban dictatorship a kinder and gentler dictatorship . President Obama said lifting sanctions would make the Castro regime a better regime .
 Venezuela's socialist Chavista dictatorship is rounding up opponents . Like the totalitarian pros they are, it didn't take long for Venezuela's dictatorship to round up opponents in Venezuela .
 Chavista goon squads swooped down on two leading opposition figures, Leopoldo Lopez and Antonio Ledezma . The goons spirited the men off to parts unknown in a SEBIN van .
 It was a familiar tactic for an experienced totalitarian state, not amateur hour for a newly minted dictatorship armed with a sham referendum to justify itself and just getting its feet wet . It was not a new experiment for a new regime, but it was familiar tactics for a totalitarian state .
 Sunday's referendum would have you believe that Venezuelans voted themselves willingly into Cuba-style slavery, is over . This points to what is really going on in that socialist hellhole, now that Venezuela's referendum is over, it's over .
 Another horror story about Canadian tourists trapped in Castro, Inc.'s medical system . Castro Inc. Inc. has a history of Canadian tourists getting medical treatment .
 7-year-old son got sick and ended up in one of Castro, Inc.'s ""wonderful"" and ""free"" hospitals . The family went to the hospital to have fun, but their son was sick .
 Most Canadians probably find it heartbreaking to think of what this family is going through . But, normally, they don't stop to think that every Cuban lives in this kind of hell, day in, day out, with no options of any kind .
 Fifty Ladies in White arrested in Cuba in another Sunday of violent repression by Castro regime . Castro regime is known for its violent repression of women .
 Yesterday was the 107th Sunday of the #TodosMarchamos campaign . The Ladies in White and other human rights activists held a peaceful protest march calling for the release of political prisoners .
 By the end of the day, around 50 Ladies in White had been violently arrested by State Security thugs of the Castro dictatorship .
 There is a long list of crimes against humanity committed on the Cuban people by the vicious and murderous Castro dictatorship . Castro dictatorship committed crimes against human rights to the people of Cuba, writes CNN.com .
 Not only do they murder, imprison, torture, and enslave, they starve the people as well . They starve them as well as starve them, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 President Trump is putting the pressure back on Cuba's odious communist regime, and they don't like it a bit . Cuba complains once again about United States intervention .
 President Obama gave Cuba's Castro regime everything it wanted, while getting nothing in return . But Trump really isn't meddling, he's undoing Obama's awful mistake, he says .
 President Trump on Friday reset American expectations for communist Cuba . President Trump reset American and global expectations for Cuba .
 He boldly promised that communist Cuba, like East Germany, would one day be free . Cuba was ruled by the Cuban government in the 1950s and '60s .
 He envisioned the 60-year yoke of communist oppression, murder and . unrepentant violation of all moral norms, ending. ending . He envisioned . the 60 years yoke . ended .
 In Miami's "Little Havana," President Obama reframed U.S. foreign policy in terms of Reagan, Kohl and Thatcher . In Miami, he says, "In Miami's Little Havana," he says .
 He defended individual liberty, human rights and the sensibilities of all the long-suffering Cubans and Cuban Americans . Cuban Americans and Cubans are Cuban Americans, he said .
 He spoke not of things political, but things timeless and universal . He spoke of things timeless, universal, he said . He said: "I'm not a politician, I'm a humanist. I'm an artist."
 President Trump is set to travel today to Miami to begin reversing President Obama's moves toward normal relations with Cuba . President Obama is expected to travel to Miami this week to reverse Obama's move to normal relations .
 President Trump announced a dramatic reversal Friday of the Obama administration's Cuba policy . He restored restrictions on U.S. travel to the island and new restrictions on financial transactions that benefit the communist regime's military .
 He declared that the new policy will continue to promote prosperity for the Cuban people while cracking down on human-rights abuses by the government .
 President Trump announced Friday he is nixing his predecessor's ""one-sided deal"" with the Communist nation . He is moving to restrict individual travel to the island, crack down on the flow of United States cash to the Cuban military and demand key reforms .
 Trump said he would challenge Cuba to come back to the table with a new agreement . While stopping short of a full reversal, Trump stopped short of full reversal . He said he will challenge Cuba's leaders to return to the negotiating table .
 Ben Rhodes: Americans are just pining to go to Cuba . Obama's opening to the Cuban regime is opening the door to Cuba's regime .
 Rhodes touts trips to Cuba's communist military dictatorship as somehow something in the line of 'freedom' in his new 'narrative' Airline carriers are fleeing the island island for one and tourists are bailing out .
 Ben Rhodes has gotten busy touting the virtues of President Obama's one-way U.S. rapprochement with communist Cuba . Rhodes was largely behind the one- way U.N. raucation . He was largely in favor of the one way, which he was largely
 Rhodes has started a series of tweets endorsing Castroite propaganda about the wonders of Cuba's medical care system, and how amazingly advanced it supposedly is . Rhodes cites a new Miami Herald piece that repeats hoary propaganda claims about an overtouted lung cancer vaccine called CIMAvax .
 President Trump is set to roll back a series of policies former President Obama put in place toward Cuba, a report from the Daily Caller reports .
 The changes will be announced in a June speech in Miami, the U.S.-Cuba Trade and Economic Council says . The changes are expected to be made in a speech in June .
 President Donald Trump is set to announce a rollback of former President Barack Obama's policies toward Cuba . The Daily Caller has learned that the president will rollback Obama's Cuba policy .
 Sources tell TheDC that the development is due to the behind-the-scenes efforts of Republican Florida Sen. Marco Rubio . Two sources told TheDC the development was due to a Republican Florida senator .
 Anti-embargo group says Cuba is under way to resume normalization of relations with the U.S. Cuba . The information was confirmed by John Kavulich of a nonpartisan group that spoke on the condition of anonymity .
 A homeschooling father has been ordered to spend a year under house arrest . He sought to give his children the best education available by pulling them out of the politicized state schools in Cuba .
 The sentence was announced by a Cuban court for pastor Ramón Rigal and his wife, Adya, according to the Home School Legal Defense Association . The pastor and wife were sentenced to life in prison .
 Rigas says authorities used his three-hour trial as a platform for denouncing alternatives to government-controlled education . Rigas: Authorities used his trial to denounce alternatives to state-run education .
 Thirty Ladies in White and a foreign journalist arrested in Cuba during another Sunday of violent repression . The arrests come amid a week of violence in Cuba .
 Reports from Cuba indicate 30 Ladies in White were violently arrested yesterday by Cuban State Security forces . They were attempting to attend church services and carry out their weekly peaceful protest march .
 It is also being reported that a foreign journalist who was attempting to record the Castro regime's weekly violence was also arrested and taken away by State Security . State Security is also believed to have also taken away a foreign reporter .
 At Miami college founded by Cubans exiled under communism, officials shut down pro-capitalism club . Miami college was founded by Cuban ex-cadvisaries and students .
 Turning Point USA has tabling rights at St. Paul's campus . The pro-capitalism club was granted tabling privileges last fall . The university has been criticized for its decision to allow the club to use the campus facilities .
 An administrator at the Miami-based Catholic university wrote to the club's field director that the organization's ""foul language"" does not align with the school's Catholic principles . Carmen Brown wrote to Driena Sixto that they are prohibited from promoting their cause on campus .
 Cuba, not Muslim nations, has the highest rate of U.S. visa refusals . Cuba has the lowest rate of visa refuses from the United States . Cuba is not a Muslim nation, but it is a Latin American country .
 Cuba sits atop the list of countries with the highest refusal rate for U.S. visas . By an almost 10-point margin over the second spot, Cuba tops the list . Cuba is the country with the lowest refusal rate of visas for Americans .
 Only an insane person would want to leave the Castro-communist paradise of Cuba . Of course, the left will not utter a word of protest over this because only an insane .
 Two other airliners, Silver and Frontier, have also fled for their lives . Marielitos, Frontier and Silver are the last two of the passengers .
 The service stinks, the amenities are gross, the place is thick with thieves and woman-gropers, the cost is high, and the alternatives are out there . The service is bad, but the alternative is good .
 The Caribbean is loaded with pleasant, accommodating destinations well worth a tourist's dollar for a vacation . In fact, the Caribbean is full of pleasant and accommodating destinations .
 Taking a vacation at a communist military-run resort really falls more into the Gulag category . The resort is located in the Soviet-run Soviet Union .
 'We came in with two left feet and our life savings to invest. Which is where I came from,' she says .
 "We saw an opportunity to escape our conventional, suburban middle-class lives to have the kind of family experience you cannot buy," author says . He says his wife Sarah and four children went to Cuba to escape their suburban middle class lives .
 I was introduced to a client who needed an architect — and decided to stay . I had been introduced to an architect who needed to stay. I had to work for a client . I decided to work with the client and stay .
 For years, while I helped build multi-millionpound projects like Bellomonte in Playas del Este Havana, we lived the dream . For years I helped . build multi .millionpound . projects like the golf and real estate development Bellmonte in . Playas .
 Foreigners could no longer rent private houses so we had to move to a posh suburb with diplomats and other big cheese foreigners . Foreigners were forced to move from private homes to posh suburbs with diplomats .
 Castro's regime began a purge on the same people who had been invited in to help build the economy . The purge included those who had helped build the country's economy . Castro regime began to purge those who were invited in .
 "The company I worked for and my boss were caught up in something far bigger than me," she says . The company she worked for was caught up with something far larger than herself, she said .
 Two U.S. airlines are pulling out of Cuba, ending service to the nation only about six months after regular passenger flights resumed . Passenger flights resumed for the first time in nearly 50 years .
 Silver Airways is dropping all nine of its planned routes to the nation by April 22 . Silver Airways will drop all nine planned routes by the end of the month .
 Frontier will drop Miami-Havana route on June 4 . Low-cost carrier Frontier will do the same, dropping its Miami route .
 Frontier and Silver — a small regional carrier — blamed overcapacity on the recently allowed service between the nations . In doing so, both Frontier and . Silver, both of which carriers, blame overcapacity .
 Under the Castro dictatorship, the death tally in Cuba continues to rise . The death toll in Cuba has risen to more than 100 .
 No amount of ""normalization"" or willful blindness will bring back those who have been murdered by Cuba's apartheid dictatorship or heal the wounds and scars of its victims . Cuba's "normalization" or "willful blindness" will not bring back the victims of the dictatorship .
 For two years U.S. policy has coddled and supported the brutally repressive Castro regime . All the Cuban people have gotten out of it is more misery, more pain, and more death .
 Twenty times as many people have died trying to escape Castro's Cuba as those in East Germany's East Germany . Twenty times more people died in Cuba than East Germany in the 1950s .
 The President of the United States announced that refugees fleeing persecution by a totalitarian regime would be deported . President Obama said refugees fleeing the persecution of totalitarian regimes would not be allowed to be allowed in the U.S.
 Obama's last name was Obama and the refugees were Cubans fleeing socialism . Because of his last name, Obama and his Cuban name, Cubans fled the country .
 Mexico has returned to Cuba the first contingent of Cuban migrants since former U.S. president Barack Obama decided Thursday to end a policy of granting residency to Cubans who arrive on United States soil .
 President Barack Obama announced Thursday he is ending a longstanding immigration policy that allows any Cuban who makes it to U.S. soil to stay and become a legal resident . The policy has been in place for more than a decade .
 Havana Hails End to Special U.S. Immigration Policy for Cubans . Havana has long been in the grip of a special immigration policy in the United States . Havana: "We are happy to have a better life in Cuba" Havana has been in contact with the U.N
 Ordinary Cubans worried about the economic problems that could be caused for some people by the sudden end to a once-easy pathway to life in the United States . They say many people who already left the island to take advantage of the earlier American immigration policy could wind up with nothing .
 President Barack Obama ends possibility of automatic legal residency for any Cuban who touches U.S. soil . Obama also ends possibility for automatic residency for anyone who touches United States soil . President Obama ended possibility of automatically legal residency .
 Cubans could be the biggest losers, some Cubans say . Cubans who were in the middle of trips to get to the U.S. could lose out, some say .
 Obama will end the 'wet foot, dry foot' policy that granted residency to Cubans who arrived in the U.S. without visas . The policy will be one of Obama's final acts as president .
 How Obama is exposing U.S. defense information to the world's worst intelligence traffickers . How Obama exposed the U.N. defense secrets to the worst intelligence trafficking .
 The deepest and most damaging penetration of the U.S. Defense Department by an enemy agent in modern history was pulled off by a spy working for the Castro regime in Cuba . The most damaging penetrating of the United States Defense Department has been pulled off .
 Stalinist apparatchiks always strive to avoid any stories that might unduly upset the Stalinist . So they always strive for any stories to avoid unduly upsetting Stalinist.ks who make these ""news"" bureaus possible .
 CNN itself admits to some very important Cuba-sponsored unpleasantness, about which most Americans remain ignorant . But in a rare hiccup of honesty, CNN admits to the unpleasantness .
 Donald Trump crackdown looms for Cuba as repression continues after Obama outreach . U.S. President Barack Obama has been criticized for his outreach to Cuba .
 President Obama's historic move to normalize relations with Cuba hasn't slowed repression by the Castro regime . The incoming Trump administration is likely to take a tougher stand on restricting tourism, recovering stolen U.S. assets and demanding human rights reforms .
 The administration has paved the way for increased engagement with Cuba . In the two years since Mr Obama announced a thaw in the United States' half-century policy of isolating the island nation .
 The migrants received food, water and medical care before being repatriated . The migrants were repatriated to Cabañas Bay .
 Under the so-called "wet foot, dry foot" policy, Cubans who reach U.S. soil are generally allowed to stay . Cubans intercepted at sea are usually repatriated to Cuba .
 Google's new tech partner in Cuba blocks email accounts of the Ladies in White . Google says it is working with the government of Cuba to develop a partnership with Cuba .
 Google is very proud of its new partnership with Cuba's ETECSA, the apartheid Castro dictatorship's telecom monopoly that has complete control over the internet on the island . Google is proud of the partnership with the state of Cuba .
 They must therefore be very proud that their new tech partners are using all this new technology to continue censorship and the blocking of the free flow of information to and from the island . The government must be proud that they are using this technology to censor and block the flow of the internet, writes
 To understand why leftists are weeping upon Castro's death, it is crucial to grasp the underlying foundation of the progressives' belief system . Leftists are weeping, especially of the Western variety, over the death of Castro Castro .
 This faith is interlinked with the leftist's revulsion of his own democratic-capitalist host society, which he sees as oppressive and unjust . He sees the democratic society as oppressive, unjust — and which he seeks to destroy .
 It is upon the ashes of this intended destruction that the leftist hopes to build, with his other self-appointed social redeemers, the secular socialist paradise . And it is upon this, with the leftist . The leftist . hopes to . build the secular . socialist paradise, he writes .
 Record arrival of nearly 3.5 million visitors to Cuba last year has caused a surging demand for food, causing ripple effects that are upsetting the very promise of Fidel Castro's Cuba . But the record arrival of 3.4 million visitors last year is causing a surge in demand .
 Fidel Castro's funeral car broke down as it made its way from Havana to Santiago . Funeral car was driven by the former Cuban leader to Santiago, Cuba .
 It's always funny when someone known as "el maximo lider" gets cut down a peg with a car breakdown at his supposedly exalting memorial moment .
 Castro had left his country in shambles, creating a metaphor of sorts with the broken-down — or out of gas — Cuban economy matching the state of his funeral car . What's more than a metaphor, Castro had created a metaphor for his country's economy .
 Cubans 'fear reprisals' if they don't show grief over Castro's death, dissidents say . Cuban dissidents say they fear 'revenge' for not showing grief over the death of Castro .
 The official picture is one of collective mourning by masses of people over the loss of Cuba's founder of modern Cuba .
 The music in Havana stopped playing after Fidel Castro's death Friday evening . President Raúl Castro announced the death of his older brother, Fidel .
 Bars and restaurants were told to severely restrict the sale of alcohol . Bars were also told to restrict the sales of alcohol at bars and restaurants .
 Fidelistas braved the Caribbean sun to pay homage in Revolution Square . Hundreds of thousands of Fidelistas paid homage to the slain leader .
 The Russian-made jeep carrying the ashes of the late Cuban dictator Fidel Castro broke down in the middle of his funeral procession on Saturday . Soldiers had to push the vehicle until it could be repaired .
 Liberals get hysterical over the 'alt-right' but we are living in their "alt-left" world . Liberals are hysterical over 'alt right' but they live in their 'alt left' world, they say. Liberals are outraged that they are not living in a 'alt
 "Their mainstream is radical and out of the American mainstream on almost everything," says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: "They are radical and ... out of [the American mainstream] on everything"
 Some liberals have embraced left-wing dictators from Stalin to Chavez . Some liberals distanced themselves from that love affair, though many embraced them .
 Fidel Castro's death exposed the bizarre romance liberals have with tyrants . Fidel Castro was a mass murderer masquerading as a ""president,"" The death of Fidel Castro exposed the strange relationship between liberals and dictatorships .
 Many world leaders have expressed condolences to the Cuban people upon the death of their so-called leader . Castro oversaw the murder of tens of thousands, imprisoned political opponents, gays, anyone who challenged Castro's status quo .
 There is no religious freedom in Cuba — there was room for only one god and that was Fidel . Fidel Castro was Cuba's only god, Fidel, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The actual number of those killed by the Castro brothers and their murderous associate Che Guevara can never be known only because of the number of disappeared opponents, gays, academics and the educated . The Castro brothers are known to have killed many of their enemies, gays and academics .
 Imagine taking every man, woman, and child of a major American city and murdering them . Imagine taking a group of men, women and children from a major city and killing them .
 President Obama is sending two senior officials to represent the U.S. at a service for the late Cuban leader Fidel Castro . President Obama will send them to represent him at the service on Tuesday .
 Much of the anger professed by Cuba toward the U.S. stems from assassination attempts on Castro, Rene de la Pedraja says . The Cuban government is angry that Castro was assassinated by the United States .
 Cuban dictator Fidel Castro was always a figure who embodied the political ideology of uber-liberals . Fidel Castro embodied the ideological ideology of the Cuban dictator . He was always an icon for the U.S. liberals .
 For the American left — whether young or old — it was supremely cool and non-conformist to espouse solidarity with Castro's revolution . For the U.S. left, it was always cool and not conformist to Castro's revolutionary ideals .
 Mao Zedong attracted more visceral adoration from American leftists, but of course he killed more people . He was a hero to counter-culture enthusiasts of the 1960s and a best-selling lefty author like Norman Mailer much as he is to the counter-reality Millennials who now
 Castro continues to cast a long political shadow over the ideological landscape . Castro's death so well illustrated, as his weekend death was well illustrated .
 Romania's Ceausescu wasn't executed by his own people and instead died in bed at age 90 . Unlike many other leaders, he was not executed by the people of Romania .
 During the Cuban missile crisis, he wrung a secret promise from the U.S. that it would never invade Cuba . He wrung from the United States that it never invaded Cuba . The Cuban president won't be president again .
 He survived dozens of assassination attempts by the Kennedy administration until a Castro sympathizer named Lee Harvey Oswald put a stop to them and to the life of President Kennedy in 1963 . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 by Oswald .
 Castro ruled for another 45 years after that, until his retirement in 2008 . He ruled for 45 years, persecuting dissidents, jailing gays, and murdering opponents . Castro ruled until he retired in 2008, killing opponents .
 Fidel continued to be feted and admired by world leaders . Even after he turned power over to his brother Raul, Fidel was feted . Fidel's legacy continues to be strong in the world .
 Few dictators could have collected the kind of respectful foreign tributes that poured in from Western countries after his death last Friday . Few dictators have collected such tributes as well as the tributes from the West .
 El Comandante ruled with an iron fist and firing squads, serving himself to all of the island's land, private businesses and media, along with his own private yacht, private island, 20 homes, fleet of Mercedes limos and mistresses .
 Trudeau's ridiculous mash note to the ""legendary revolutionary and orator"" caused the social media backlash of the year . Trudeau's hilarious mash note caused a backlash of social media .
 It is blank of moral judgment, empty of indignation, blind to injustice, dismissive of history and indifferent to injury . It is empty of moral judgement and empty of outrage, it is indifferent to pain, it says .
 He came to power in a revolution and so violence was probably inescapable, he says . He says: 'Violence was probably inevitable, but it was probably probably inevitable'
 "The guilty, the innocent, hardly mattered. But he followed it with mass executions," he says . The guilty or innocent, it hardly mattered .
 He imposed a totalitarian system on Cuba even harsher and more homicidal than the one that preceded it . Cuba's totalitarian system was imposed by the Cuban dictator . Cuba has a history of political assassinations .
 He persecuted homosexuals, dissidents, critical writers and journalists . He persecuted gays, dissidents and critical writers .
 He would not tolerate a free press and his own political party was the only one permitted . He would also not tolerate the free press, and would only tolerate a political party .
 "In the end, he ruined his country's economy while at the same time exporting terrorism," he says . "He ruined the economy while he exported terrorism," says CNN's John Defterios .
 Venezuela today is a quasi-police state run with the invaluable assistance of Cubans . Venezuela is run by the Cuban government, with the help of the Cuban people .
 Fidel Castro urged his Soviet allies to wipe out the U.S. In the fall of 1962, Fidel Castro called for the overthrow of the United States . Fidel Castro was assassinated by the CIA in 1961 .
 President Obama said he wanted to destroy the United States of America in a nuclear assault . He said he meant destroying the U.S. in a nuke attack .
 Khrushchev flinched from an orgy of death that would have wiped out most of the US, the USSR and Cuba . The Soviet-U.S. and Cuba would have been wiped out by the Soviet Union and Cuba.
 The dictator who liked to shout, ""Socialism or Death" is dead and out of power . Now the dictator is out of the power of Russia .
 Donald Trump threatens to undo Obama's deal with Cuba . Castro's death resets U.S.-Cuba relations . The death of Castro resets relations with the United States .
 Donald Trump will undo the Obama administration's historic diplomatic reset with Havana unless the Cuban government moves swiftly to address human rights abuses and loosen restrictions on freedom of speech and religion on the communist island .
 Reince Priebus, former chairman of the Republican National Committee, said Mr Trump will keep an open mind about future relations with Cuba but demand major changes .
 Castro advocated striking the U.S. with Soviet nukes, but where that idea originated? The evidence is not clear . The idea is unclear where it originated .
 Obama managed to turn Castro's death into a tribute to himself . Obama, as usual, manages to turn death into tribute to his own self .
 College students in the nation's capital thought it was a ""tough question"" whether former Cuban President Fidel Castro or American President-elect Donald Trump is more favorable .
 Many students could not give a clear answer whether they thought Castro, the Cuban dictator who died last week, or Trump was a better leader .
 Progressives' and leftists' outpouring of praise for Fidel Castro at his death was to be expected . But it has been more fulsome, tone-deaf, and cloying than I expected .
 For just a few examples see President Obama, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, and United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki Moon . President Obama and Canadian PM Justin Trudeau are examples of Canada .
 Republican members of Congress from Florida panned President Obama's response to the death of Cuban President Fidel Castro . They attacked it as an inadequate response to a dictator who victimized their constituents .
 Cuban refugees and their families make up a large percentage of the population in Miami . Castro's death was met with celebrations in the streets of Miami .
 The jubilation felt by many Cuban-Americans was a sharp contrast to the statement issues by the president . The president offered condolences to Castro's family and did not directly mention his human rights abuses .
 The bearded revolutionary finally gave up the ghost on Friday at age 90 . Born to wealth and privilege and educated in exclusive private schools, he was born to wealth .
 Despite the fact that he was a murderous, dissent-squashing, and presumably very smelly tyrant who turned his nation into the sort of drab, flea-bitten torture chamber that all socialist republics eventually become, he was eulogized up the yin-
 The Baptist minister who just chose a sorrowful exile to protect his family and the Catholic priest who might soon have to flee to save his own life . The blind lawyer struggling to document atrocities despite so many obstacles . The Ladies in White beaten each Sunday simply for marching peacefully to advocate for political
 Cubans stand in lines to eat whatever is dispensed from an insufficient ration book . Cubans make less than $25 a month, unable to find aspirin at a clinic . Young people trapped in a life of hopelessness .
 Nine Liberal Hollywood Elites who Normalized Communist Dictator Fidel Castro normalized Castro . Hollywood elites normalize Castro's rule of state of Cuba .
 Through the years, a long list of Hollywood elites have been bewitched by Castro, despite his Communist regime's imprisonment of political opponents, homosexuals, and journalists .
 Actors like Jack Nicholson and Danny Glover have accepted invitations to the tiny Caribbean island . Hollywood directors from Steven Spielberg to Oliver Stone, have also accepted invitations .
 The race is on to see which world leader can most fulsomely praise Fidel Castro's legacy, while delicately averting their eyes from his less savory characteristics . The race for world leaders to praise Castro is on the line .
 Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and U.S. president Barack Obama are leading the way . Trudeau and Obama are both duly elected leaders of democracies who should know better .
 Fidel Castro presented himself to the world as a modest man of the people . With his shaggy beard and rumpled, olive-drab fatigues, he presented himself as modest . Fidel Castro was known for his military style of uniform and uniform .
 Castro's public image was a carefully crafted myth, more fiction than fact . Castro's image was more than a myth, but it was more of a myth than fact, CNN's John Defterios says .
 Cuba remained a one-party state under dictator Fidel Castro until 2006 . Fidel Castro held power without free elections from 1959 until health problems forced him to step aside .
 Castro's communist regime executed hundreds of political opponents and drove tens of thousands more into exile . Hundreds of dissidents today languish in Cuban prisons .
 The U.S. State Department, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch all listed Castro's Cuba as among the worst violators of human rights on the planet . The Committee to Protect Journalists condemned the harassment and imprisonment of journalists .
 Castro, who was 90, was long a scourge of the U.S. who brought the Cold War to America's doorstep . Castro's death comes at the age of 90 . Castro was a long-time scourge of Cuba .
 Cuban state media reports the death of their former leader, Fidel Castro, at age 90 . State media: Fidel Castro died Friday evening at the age of 90 . The death was announced by state media in Cuba .
 For many, not even his death will fill the void caused by his life . But for many others, it will not even be enough for others to mourn .
 Fidel Castro's brother Raul, now 85, ruled Cuba for over five decades . Fidel and Raul's brother Fidel suffered under the tyranny of Fidel and then Raul .
 They watched the regime destroy a country and export the same perverted model of social justice throughout the developing world, they say . They say . The regime destroyed a country .
 My grandfather would often tell us how he would hide indoors while Fidel's firing squads would slaughter innocent people nearby . His grandfather would hide inside while the firing squads were being gunned down .
 He denied that he was communist and locked up people like my dad's cousin for publicly saying so . He denied it and said he was a communist . He said people were locked up for saying they were communists .
 A bit later, he declared himself a communist but did not release those who called him one . He declared himself as a communist, but released those who said he was .
 He leaves political prisons, families crushed, and empty store shelves . He leaves family and friends crushed, leaving political prisons .
 Fidel Castro was a tyrant who oppressed Cubans and brought misery to many for decades . While much of the news coverage emphasized that reality, journalists on ABC, CNN and MSNBC couldn't resist crediting him for great advancements in education and literacy .
 President Obama's and President Trump's statements on the death of Castro couldn't be any more different .
 What is not said that is the most revealing about President Obama's remarks, says the president .
 Some will mourn his passing, and many an obituary will praise him . Oddly enough, some will mourn him and others will praise his passing .
 Millions of Cubans have been waiting impatiently for this moment for more than half a century . Millions will simply ponder his crimes and recall the pain and suffering he caused. Millions will recall his crimes .
 The emotional trauma that Fidel and Raul Castro have cruelly imposed on generations of Cubans and their children cannot be easily explained . It's not easy to explain why the emotional trauma has been inflicted on generations .
 Thousands of friends and family members have been killed in prison, shot in front of a firing squad, or drowned at sea seeking freedom . Thousands of people have been murdered in prison or drowned in a bid to escape the country .
 Several hundred young Cubans, seeking to depose Fidel, were instead killed or wounded at the Bay of Pigs . 1200 more were imprisoned before being freed for ransom .
 Fidel Castro's messianic dreams of being the world's revolutionary leader didn't stop at Cuba's shores . Castro's dream of being a world leader came to an end in Cuba . Fidel Castro was a revolutionary leader in Cuba, Cuba's first president .
 He trained hundreds of PLO and PFLP terrorists and other assassins to wreak havoc in the Middle East and against Western democracies . He trained thousands of PLOs and other terrorists and assassins .
 He tried to bring his communist revolution to Latin American and other Caribbean countries . He was a communist leader in the 1960s and 1970s .
 He sent Cuban troops to intervene in Angola and propped up a failing Soviet-led regime . In Angola, he intervened in a failed state of Angola .
 Amnesty International reports hardly capture the full picture of the situation . The apologists might have consulted the various Amnesty reports .
 Fidel Castro allowed the Soviet Union to impose complete domination of Cuba . With no apology to Francois Hollande, Fidel Castro allows no apology . Castro allowed no apology for allowing France to impose its domination on Cuba .
 Fidel Castro drove Cuba to sub-Haiti levels of poverty . That helped Fidel Castro drive a prosperous nation to sub the poverty levels of Haiti . Fidel Castro's Cuba is now one of the world's poorest countries .
 His repression was such that Cubans flee at the first opportunity, leaving everything behind, at great risk to their own lives . Cubans fled the first chance to escape his repression, leaving their lives behind .
 The Straits of Florida have become a graveyard without crosses . That is why the Straits have been dubbed a "graveyard"
 The social justice crowd might have a look at Orlando Jimenez-Leal's documentary 8A . 8A captures Castro's show-trial of General Arnaldo Ochoa and other officers .
 Their government lawyers pleaded with the court that their clients must receive the death penalty . The death penalty was duly carried out with no appeal, the court ruled .
 Castro's death spurs drink specials galore as Cuban-American restaurants celebrate occasion . Cuban-Americans celebrate occasion at restaurants across the U.S.
 Fidel Castro's passing Friday evening prompted impromptu parties on the streets of Miami . Area establishments have announced plans to continue commemorating the dictator's death with a slew of drink specials .
 Bars and restaurants in Miami offered discounted cocktails and other deals on Saturday . The city has the largest Cuban population in all of the United States .
 Elian Gonzalez, the Cuban castaway boy rescued off the coast of Florida in 1999 by a pair of sport fishermen, spoke fondly of Fidel Castro on Saturday . The late former Cuban leader was a father figure who became a friend of the late Castro, he said .
 Gonzalez, then five, was found floating on an inner tube after his mother and other Cubans died while trying to escape communist Cuba for the U.S. Gonzalez was five-years-old when he was found by his mother .
 Castro's body was found on November 25, 1999 — exactly 16 years prior to the day of Castro's death . He was found in 1999 — 16 years before Castro was found .
 President Obama and the Mainstream Media are mourning the death of Cuban dictator Fidel Castro . They are whitewashing his crimes against the Cuban people while comparing him to George Washington . President Obama compared Castro to Washington, comparing Castro to the president .
 "History will record and judge the enormous impact of this singular figure on the people and world around him,"" the president said in a statement .
 It is sickening to watch the White House mourn the loss of their beloved Castro Castro . Castro was a ruthless dictator who was the personification of evil .
 Marco Rubio was enraged by President Obama's half-hearted attempt to whitewash Castro's atrocities . Rubio was angered by Obama's attempt to gloss over Castro's crimes in Cuba .
 Evidence mounting that President Obama's overzealous defense of his Cuba gambit cost Hillary Clinton the state of Florida . Obama's "opening Cuba" gambit may have cost Clinton the election .
 That misstep could end up wiping out most of the president's carefully curated ""legacy"" achievements .
 President Obama and his young Deputy National Security Adviser Ben Rhodes defended diplomatic relations with one of the world's last communist dictatorships . The president and his deputy national security adviser defended the relationship from criticism .
 Even the smallest amendment that watered down coddling the Castros drew fulminating threats of vetoes from the White House . The White House has threatened to veto vetoes even the smallest amendments .
 President Obama went for broke in late October to stick a bigger needle in his opponents' eye . President Obama decided to stick the needle in the eye with a larger needle . Obama has been criticized for his actions .
 President Obama lifted limits on the import of cigars and rum . He then ordered our ambassador to the United Nations to abstain from a vote condemning the U.S. economic embargo on Cuba .
 Like ObamaCare, the Iran nuclear deal, or ending Mideast wars, the plan is not working out as promised . Like ObamaCare and the Iran nuke deal, it's not working as promised.
 A little noticed Obama administration directive on Cuba was released Oct. 14 . The directive instructed the U.S. director of national intelligence to assist and cooperate with Cuba's intelligence services .
 The directive has raised red flags on Capitol Hill . Some lawmakers are concerned that Cuba will pass along critical U.S. intelligence to the Iranians . Iran has made moves in recent years to extend its influence in Cuba .
 The change is part of a new round of regulations announced last week by the Obama administration . The Obama administration announced the change last week .
 President Obama quietly changed U.S. policy to allow intelligence sharing with Castro regime last week, Senate GOP learned . Obama changed policy last week to allow sharing with the Castro regime, Senate Republican has learned .
 Treasury Department announced that it would loosen rules on how much merchandise American travelers could bring back from Cuba . The change was made under the auspices of the Treasury Department .
 Florida Sen. Ted Cruz says the new regulation has much broader applications . He says it could be used in a variety of ways . Cruz: "It's not just a matter of law enforcement, but it's important to make sure people are safe"
 The changes change the rules that define which Cuban officials face travel restrictions and other bans on entering into contracts with Americans . Rubio says the changes are important to Sen. Marco Rubio, because they change how Cuba deals with the U.S. Rubio says .
 Despite Obama's 'Normalization,' The Castros' Cuba is As Repressive As Ever . Cuba is as repressive as ever, despite Obama's "normalization"
 Cuban government cracks down on private restaurants . Private restaurants prove successful, so Cuban government crack down on them . Cuban government cracked down on restaurants after success .
 Cuba's private restaurants, better known as ""paladares"" , are being watched closely these days by the Castro government . The government has temporarily suspended the concession of licenses because of alleged rule violations .
 By the time he leaves office in three months, Obama will have substantially re-normalized relations with Castro regime . Obama will be leaving office in January .
 Many Cuban-Americans and human rights groups have criticized Obama's visit to Cuba . They say it has not been reciprocated with greater respect for democracy and the rule of law in Cuba .
 Amnesty International: Despite increasingly open diplomatic relations, severe restrictions on freedoms of expression, association and movement continued . Amnesty International says the situation continues to be 'severely restricted'
 The Obama administration announced Friday a new round of executive actions designed to increase trade and travel with the communist island of Cuba . The White House says the actions will increase trade, travel with communist island .
 Many Americans have been waiting for — no more restrictions on the island's famed rum and cigars . And this is the one many Americans are waiting for . No more restrictions will be imposed on rum, cigars .
 Under the new rules, travelers can purchase unlimited quantities of Cuban rum and cigars in any country where they are sold so long as they are for personal consumption . The new rules also apply to travelers to Cuba .
 You can't order Cuban rum and cigars online and have them shipped to your home . You can also order them from the internet .
 Donald Trump played to Cuban-American sentiments Friday night in Miami . He said he would reverse all of President Barack Obama's executive actions normalizing relations with Cuba . That's unless the oppressive government in Havana changes its approach to human rights and political freedom .
 Illegal border crossings by Cubans has surpassed last year's record at the same time deportations are at an all-time low . The U.S. is a huge ""magnet"" for even higher levels of immigration from the communist island, a new report says .
 Cuban immigration has hit 46,635, breaching last year's ceiling of 43,154, according to Center for Immigration Studies . Cuban immigration is the highest level ever recorded in the United States .
 TSA official Admits No Federal Air Marshals are Allowed on non-chartered US-Cuba commercial flights . TSA official: No federal air marshals are allowed on US-Cuban flights . Officials say they will not be allowed to fly in Cuba .
 Air marshals are not currently allowed on non-chartered commercial flights between the U.S. and Cuba, despite reports to the contrary . A top Transportation Security Administration official admitted that federal air marshals aren't currently allowed .
 A draft agreement would allow federal air marshals on commercial flights . The TSA and Cuban government are working on an agreement to allow marshals to fly .
 Although his iconic picture is widespread, most people have no idea what he did . Most people still don't know what he was doing .
 He helped Castro take over Cuba, and fought for Communism in the Congo and Bolivia . He also fought for the Communist Party in Congo and Bolivian .
 While in Cuba, he lived in a palatial house and gleefully executed hundreds or perhaps thousands of political prisoners . He lived in an enormous house, living in palatial home and living in a palace .
 James Patterson thinks that, unlike Cuba, America is unable to ""take care of the basics"" — education, health care, and food . Patterson: Unlike Cuba, the U.S. is not able to take care of health, education and food seriously .
 Patterson wrote and hosts a new documentary, ""Murder of a Small Town,"" that looks at two rural communities in Florida, Pahokee and Belle Glade . The documentary is based on the murder of a small town .
 The towns have been abandoned by industry, are violent and poverty-stricken . They offer a contrast to Palm Beach and other affluent coastal communities to the east . The towns are violent, violent and offer a stark contrast to the affluent coastal areas .
 AT&T to provide cellphone roaming, other services for tourists in Cuba . The U.S. has been in Cuba for more than a decade . The country's largest island nation is Cuba .
 Dallas-based telecommunications giant on Monday announced the agreement with the state telecommunications company, Etecsa . The deal was announced in a joint statement on Monday .
 Behind the tourist facade, the real hell of Castro's Cuba that Cuban's live in . Behind the tourism facade, behind the real Cuban's lives in . Cuba .
 Earlier this year President Barack Obama became the first sitting president to visit Cuba since Calvin Coolidge in 1928 .
 The trip came one year after the two nations moved to re-establish diplomatic relations . The trip was part of a year after a year of diplomatic relations being restored .
 Congress is considering steps that would ease restrictions on Americans traveling to the island nation . Congress is also considering steps to ease travel restrictions to Cuba .
 Law allows immigrants to stay in the U.S. if they get one foot on American soil . They're taking advantage of a law that allows them to stay if they're in the country .
 The law is a relic from the Cold War and one that some want to change . It's a Cold War relic that some say it's time to get rid of it .
 Thousands of Cuban migrants have been transferred from Central America to Mexico . Thousands of Cubans have been moved to Mexico in recent months .
 Under the current interpretation of the Cuban Adjustment Act and the ""wet foot, dry foot"" policy that grows out of it, Cubans without visas are waved into the United States and given legal status and full access to welfare programs .
 A new wave of Cubans has been building in Laredo, Texas, for several years, says Ruben Navarrette . He says this new wave has been growing for years in the U.S.
 The number of new annual arrivals nearly doubled from 2014 to 2015 . It is roughly six times higher now than it was in 2009, which marked the lowest point .
 U.S. approves flights to Havana from 10 American cities, via 8 airlines . Havana to Cuba via 10 American airports, via eight airlines .
 The United States Department of Transportation approved commercial flights to Havana from 10 American cities . The U.S. government approved the flights on Thursday .
 Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx outlined the department's awarding of tentative approval for eight United States airlines to begin flights from 10 U.S. cities this fall . Foxx: Eight airlines will be allowed to fly from 10 cities .
 As Cuban salsa beats pulsate along Obispo Street in the oldest section of this Caribbean capital, bearded men raise their hands to their ears and face east toward Mecca .
 24 migrants who've been detained for more than a month on a U.S. Coast Guard cutter will be processed for repatriation back to Cuba . The decision means 24 migrants have been detained on a United States Coast Guard Cutter .
 A man sleeps undisturbed on a cot, wrapped in a comforter, in an immigrant shelter . The shelter is just blocks north of the U.S.-Mexico border . It is located in a chapel just blocks from the border .
 The Annunciation House shelter has been full of rooms full for months . The shelter's chapel doesn't normally serve as a bedroom, but for months the rest of the rooms are full .
 From February to May, about 4,000 Cubans crossed over the Rio Grande River into Texas' westernmost city . The border city is home to the largest population in the United States .
 After making their way to shelters and churches, many have slept in crowded, makeshift quarters on bunk beds, cots, couches and pews . Many have been sleeping in crowded beds, beds and cots .
 The others were taken later to be checked out before being turned over to U.S. Border Patrol .
 It's unclear if the migrants will be able to stay in the U.S. under the ""Wet Foot, Dry Foot"" policy . If they are returned to Cuba, they could be sent back to the island .
 Nearly a dozen Cuban migrants landed ashore with a rickety raft in broad daylight Saturday . Beachgoers near Fort Lauderdale, Florida, watched and cheered on the weathered travelers .
 Cuba is refusing to approve visa applications for members of the U.S. House Homeland Security Committee . The committee's chairman says the move is in response to a request from Cuba .
 Members hoping to leave on Friday afternoon to examine lagging security in the country's airports . The group hopes to examine security in airports, which are set to begin making flights to the United States this year .
 The lawmakers were forced to cancel when their applications were denied that morning . The lawmakers had been in the process of applying for the job .
 Cubans in Ecuador turn to Mexican Embassy for help in reaching United States . Cubans say they want to get to the U.S. by the end of the year .
 Scores of Cubans are camped out in front of Mexico's embassy in Ecuador . They are appealing for help in reaching the United States . The campers are appealing to Mexico's government for help .
 In 1958 Cuba had the 13th lowest infant-mortality on earth — ahead of France, Belgium, West Germany, Israel, Japan, Austria, Italy, Spain, and Portugal . Cuba also had the lowest infant mortality on earth .
 Obama Touts Cuba Relations While It Still Appears on U.S. Terrorist List Alongside Al Qaeda, Hamas, Hamas . Cuba still appears on terror list alongside Al Qaeda and Hamas . Obama touts Cuba relations while it still appears to be a terrorist group .
 Cuba for decades appeared on the State Department's list of nation's that sponsor terrorism . Before Obama ""normalized"" relations and lifted economic sanctions, Cuba had been listed as a sponsor of terrorism . Cuba was on the list of nations that sponsor terrorist acts .
 China's longtime communist regime is renowned for committing atrocious human rights violations . It openly offers refuge to criminals on the run from U.S. justice .
 Among them is a Black Liberation Army leader on the FBI's most wanted list after a prison escape . He escaped prison after a conviction for murdering a New Jersey State Trooper . He was convicted of murdering a state trooper .
 Medicare fraud ringleaders have escaped to Cuba after fleecing the U.S. government out of tens of millions of dollars . More recently, Medicare ringleaders escaped to the island nation of Cuba .
 Cubans who presented themselves at the land port of entry were not allowed to enter immediately, but were sent to the United States Embassy in Mexico City to make their asylum claim . Prior to the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act .
 Following the implementation of the 1996 act, they were processed as Expedited Removal/Credible Fear cases . They would be taken into custody and detained until their asylum claim/fear claim could be reviewed .
 In those days, the government did not operate under the assumption that all Cubans have a credible fear of return or persecution, as is the case today . The government didn't operate under that assumption, as it does today, as well .
 Cubans were questioned closely about their personal history, and often determined to be economic migrants and thus unqualified to receive asylum or parole . Cubans often were determined not to be eligible for parole or asylum .
 Those who failed to establish a credible fear of return were not permitted to enter the U.S. Those who did not meet the criteria were not allowed to enter .
 I don't think we should be giving away the kitchen sink without ensuring the dishes are clean . I'm not sure if we should give away the sink without the dishes being clean. I'm sure it's a good idea to give away a kitchen sink .
 Why not demand these communist countries, with whom we are ""normalizing"" relations, improve their human rights record? We need to demand that they do .
 Obama just stood there and allowed Castro to rant about the United States . Unless, we are, as Raul Castro dictated to Obama, guilty of worse violations .
 Obama could have brought attention to the fact that Cubans are showing up on our shores, not the reverse . Perhaps he could have done the same thing .
 Feds open border to 4,000 Cubans, interviewed just 1 hour before release . Feds interview Cubans just an hour before they are released .
 Border Patrol officials are opening up the Texas border to let 4,000 Cubans in . They take about an hour to interview them and check their criminal background, before letting them enter the U.S. Most Cubans will stay for life in the United States .
 President Juan Carlos Varela said the decision was necessary . Costa Rica and Nicaragua had recently closed their borders to Cubans heading north .
 Panama agrees to transfer 3,500 Cubans hoping to reach the U.S. to a town in northern Mexico . Panama has also agreed to transfer more than 3,000 Cubans to northern Mexico to the town . The move is part of a plan to transfer Cubans from Panama
 President Varela said the flights to Mexico could last two to three weeks . The flights are expected to last up to two weeks, he said .
 Historic Cuba cruise returns to the U.S. with suspected norovirus outbreak on board after 14 passengers fall ill . 14 passengers fell ill .
 The ship returned to Miami a week later — around 6.30am on Sunday . During the journey, there were reports that several passengers had fallen ill .
 Cuban man arrested for waving American flag as first U.S. cruise ship arrives arrives in Cuba . Cuban man waved American flag during arrest for waving it in front of crowd .
 Before we get too excited about the tide of change in Cuba we should probably consider the case of Daniel Llorente .
 When the first U.S. cruise ship in the living memory of most of us arrived in Castroland, Daniel was pretty enthusiastic . Daniel was enthusiastic .
 Some of his fellow observers expressed concern over this overt display of pro-American unity sentiments . But Mr Llorente was not dismayed .
 1st cruise from a U.S. port in decades leaves Miami for Cuba . As it turns out, that really didn't work out very well . The first cruise from Miami to Cuba in decades has been canceled .
 Passengers set sail from Miami on historic cruise to Cuba . First in decades to depart from a U.S. seaport for communist island nation .
 There's an old Russian proverb that if you spit in the face of a weakling he will give thanks for the rain . There's also a Russian proverb: If you spit at the weakling, it will give him thanks for rain .
 This should be a Cuban proverb, to describe Barack Obama's not such an excellent adventure to Havana . Obama's trip to Havana was not an excellent experience, says Cuban president .
 Raul Castro, the Cuban president, did everything short of expectoration to make the U.S. president grovel for the regime's affections . The Cuban president did not expectoration .
 The irony is that Castro brothers and their regime are on the ropes . The irony, obvious to everyone, is that the Castro brothers are under the ropes, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The iconic sugar industry is all but destroyed, with abandoned cropland, rusting refineries and clumsy marketing . The iconic industry is now all but but destroyed .
 The White House disinvited a Grammy-award winning jazz legend who is a strong defender of democracy in Cuba . The decision to disinvite the jazz legend was contemptible .
 The fact that it has now embarrassingly backtracked and re-invited him proves it had acted like corporations that are only too happy to ignore human rights violations in exchange for future profits with Cuba until public pressure gets too intense . Cuba is now embarrassed to have had to backtrack
 In other words, engagement with the Castros is not changing them, as promised, it's changing us . Engagement with them is changing us, as many of us predicted, as well .
 Carnival finally appears to have noticed that it was in the middle of a PR fiasco with its ""Hate Boat" to Havana cruises that did not permit Cuban-born Americans aboard . On Monday, Carnival finally appeared to have realized that it had been in a PR mess .
 The company announced that it will ""delay"" the trips if the Castro regime refuses to change its policies banning such people from arriving by sea . After a weekend of withering criticism, the company announced it will delay the trips .
 Even Secretary of State John Kerry, a champion of President Obama's engagement of the communist dictatorship, thought Carnival was on shaky ground .
 Cuban Activist Living in USA for Nearly Half a Century Ordered Deported Deported . Cuban activist living in U.S. for nearly half a century ordered deported . Activist living in US for nearly 50 years ordered Deported.
 Obama finally gets around to actually deporting someone . Obama has been accused of slavishly licking the boots of the Cuban dictator .
 The cocaine was found camouflaged among tanks of cane-sugar syrup, police say . It was part of operation Caña Brava, the country's National Police say .
 Mario Diaz-Balart fired off a press release blaming the Cuban government and the Castro regime for trafficking cocaine . The Cuban government has been accused of trafficking cocaine in the past . Diaz Balart says the government and Castro regime is trafficking cocaine.
 Handlers responsible for shaping the image of the U.S. president have taken things to another level . The U.N. president's handlers have taken a different level .
 President Obama's recent trip to Cuba was the first such visit by a U.S. president in 88 years . Obama's visit to Cuba is the first since President Nixon made the trip in 1964 .
 Obama's visit to the Caribbean in March 2016 was his boldest step yet in advancing his controversial agenda to reset diplomatic relations between the two nations . Obama's short trek 90 miles from the United States to its Caribbean neighbour was his first step in the region .
 Among the more awkward events on Obama's Cuban itinerary was a meeting with a group of political dissidents . Many fear thawing of relations between Washington and Havana will only embolden the repressive tendencies of Cuban president Raúl Castro .
 Michel Mirabal is a contemporary Cuban artist whose sprawling painting My New Friend provided the striking backdrop to the meeting . Mirabal's work is one of the world's most famous works of artworks .
 Mr Obama flew at least 1,135 miles in each direction to get from Washington DC to Havana . Cuba is about 90 miles from the Florida Keys .
 Teddy Roosevelt once told a campaign audience that weakness invites contempt . President Teddy Roosevelt told a crowd that weakness invites contempt. President Roosevelt once said that weakness invited contempt .
 Raúl Castro keeps going out of his way to show the world that it was President Obama, not he, who really wanted to do the wave at the baseball game .
 Raúl Castro watched the president of the U.S. praise his education and health care system . Second, Raúal Castro watched his education system being praised by the president .
 Fidel Castro wrote an op-ed in the state media blasting President Obama . Fidel Castro also wrote a piece blasting Obama . The Castro family has a history of anti-American sentiment .
 Cuba's state-controlled newspaper has added insult to injury following Fidel Castro's scathing criticism of President Barack Obama . The Havana Tribune, a state-run Cuban newspaper, published the scathing criticism .
 Former aid worker who spent four years behind bars in Cuba says he can't tolerate Democratic presidential candidate and Vermont Sen. Sen. Bernie Sanders .
 Bernie Sanders' praise for some of the Cuban government's accomplishments . Bernie Sanders says he's proud of Cuba's achievements in Cuba .
 Sanders was one of three senators who visited Gross while he was in a Cuban prison after being accused of being a spy . Sanders helped secure the aid worker's eventual release .
 Gross, who was jailed in 2009, was eventually released in December 2014 . Gross was released from prison in December last year .
 Rodrigo ""Timochenko"" Londono is one of the most wanted bank robbers and fugitives in the world . Londono was arrested in 2007 in connection with a series of bank robberies and drug crimes .
 The State Department is offering a $5 million reward for information about the Communist terrorist leader . State Department has offered a $ 5 million reward to find the leader .
 The State Department had to do the same thing, ask Secretary of State Kerry . But all the State Department has to do was ask Secretary Kerry .
 Kerry met with Timochenko, the leader of FARC, a Marxist terrorist organization that appears on his own department's list of foreign terrorist organizations a little above Al Qaeda . Obama did the wave with the Cuban dictator and met with the FARC leader .
 The State Department accuses him of ordering the kidnapping of Americans and responsibility for much of the cocaine that is smuggled into the U.S. State Department also says he is responsible for the kidnapping and the smuggling of Americans .
 Kerry accepted a signed copy of a memoir by the terror group's former leader which was addressed to ""Senor"" Kerry . But none of that bothered Kerry who accepted the book .
 The week after after the United States President Barack Obama's visit, things in Cuba have returned to normal . Things in Cuba are back to normal after a week-long visit by President Obama .
 It is in this particular city and the eastern part of the island where most protesters have been detained . Most protesters are detained in the east of the country .
 President Obama's trip to Cuba was prepped and re-prepped so that nothing would go off with a glitch . Obama's "historic" trip was pre-planned and pre-prepared for the trip .
 Deputy National Security Advisor Ben Rhodes jetted into Havana for the preparations . Secretary of State John Kerry might have made an appearance there, too, too .
 President Obama spouted his treacly niceties, drew his moral equivalences and blended it all out with a sea of banalities about ""the future"" in a not-so-disguised effort to create his own Nixon In China legacy thing .
 Never mind that dissidents were being beaten by Cuban security organs and that Raul Castro offered no concessions toward human rights . The dissidents were beaten by security organs, and that ""President"" Raul had no concessions .
 Obama's was laser-focused on sending the message of ""fun"" for the trip . Obama's team was laser focused on sending a message of "fun"
 As a major terror attack engulfed Brussels, Obama did the ""wave"" with the Cuban dictator . Obama did a major terrorist attack on the island of Belgium .
 Many of us warned about Obama's Marxist sympathies before he was first elected president, and we've repeatedly pointed it out during his presidency .
 Our warnings were met with cries of extremism, irrationality and, of course, racism . Yet our warnings have been met with calls of extremism and irrationality .
 Obama played his fiddle in Cuba and paid homage to the Marxist Castro regime while Belgium was burning . Obama spoke to a group of young people in Argentina .
 He praised President Raul Castro in Cuba for his country's universal health care and quality education . He praised the Castro government for its quality education and health care .
 Fidel Castro says Obama's 'syrupy words' were enough to cause a heart attack . Fidel Castro: Obama's words caused a 'heart attack' in Cuba . Castro: 'I'm not surprised'
 President Obama's words about brotherhood and shared history were enough to give Cubans ""a heart attack,"" Fidel Castro said Monday . Fidel Castro made his first public response to Obama's visit to Cuba last week . Obama's call to leave behind the enmity of the past was
 Obama also missed the irony that while he had just warmed up to a present-day Cuban dictatorship with blood on its hands, he then blamed his distant predecessors for warming up to long-gone Argentine dictatorship .
 Argentine General Galtieri and his predecessors may have overseen the killing of some 20,000 . Raul Castro, who may have the blood of about the same number on his hands, is alive — and in the back-slapping company of President Obama .
 Secretary of State John Kerry met last week with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia . The group is listed by the State Department as a terror organization . It is widely recognized as the deadliest Marxist terror group in the world .
 Cuban-sponsored talks have yielded little but one-way concessions to terror . Thus far, the Cuban-backed talks have only yielded one way to get more concessions .
 At the beginning of his presidency, Barack Obama traveled to Cairo, Europe and the United Nations to ""apologize"" for past American actions and attitudes, which he claimed helped create divisions between countries .
 With the president's visit to Havana, Cuba, that tour has come full circle . The president's tour of Cuba comes full circle with his visit to Cuba .
 Cuban President Raul Castro criticized the U.S. for what he asserted was America's violation of human rights . Castro was speaking at a joint news conference with Cuban President Vladimir Putin .
 President Obama's so-called ""remarks to the Cuban people"" — delivered in Havana and broadcast throughout Cuba on Tuesday the 22nd of March 2016 — were not in the least surprising or remarkable . Obama's "remarks" to the Cubans were not surprising .
 The speech was somewhat memorable, for two reasons, both of which relate to context . Nonetheless, it is somewhat memorable for some of the speech .
 Obama declared that the communist takeover that led to the Castros' 57-year dictatorship was a ""liberation movement,"" same as America's 1776 revolution . Obama declared the takeover of Cuba was a "liberation of the revolution"
 Obama's well-known for his false equivalencies, but this one stands out for its idiocy . Obama's false equivalency is not the first time he's been accused of being stupid .
 It must have drawn a stifled horse-laugh from Cuban military dictator Raul Castro . Raul's military dictator must have seen the joke .
 The president's decision to visit Cuba was a great mistake from the start, says CNN.com's John Sutter . President Obama's visit to Cuba is a mistake, he says .
 Gen. Gen. David Cameron's "red-line" was clearly another one of the president's ""red-lines" in Syria . But like his red-line of the use of chemical weapons in Syria, such assurance was clearly just another one .
 Since the thaw began, the Cuban government has doubled down on its repressive tactics, with political and religious persecution levels increasing drastically . The Cuban government is known for its anti-gay practices, including homosexuality .
 Plaza de la Revolucion is a hideous expanse of concrete at the center of Havana that makes Tiananmen Square look positively charming . Cuba's government-sanctioned "educational" tour to Cuba was one of the first places I visited .
 President Obama was featured in that now-infamous photo in front of a giant mural of Che Guevara . It was there that he was pictured in that famous photo .
 The president lent his imprimatur to Guevara, a totalitarian who was responsible for the death of thousands . It was unfortunate that the president lent .
 The building that Guevara's face adorns is home to the Cuban Ministry of the Interior . The building is located in Havana, Cuba .
 Cuba's Interior Ministry is tasked with protecting endangered waterfowl . Unlike our own Ministry of the Interior, Cuba's is not charged with innocuous tasks such as protecting endangered birds .
 It operates the National Revolutionary Police, which, in addition to keeping law and order on the streets, harasses and arrests dissidents, and suppresses ""counter-revolutionary" activities .
 US tourists seek preserved Cuba — and Cubans seek change . In other words, it's Cuba's version of the Stasi. US tourists seeking preserved Cuba .
 American Sue Pemberton rushed to Havana to experience authentic Cuba before the communist island gets swamped by capitalism . Sue is an American who traveled to Cuba before capitalism swept the island .
 Already booming tourism is set to explode in the wake of President Barack Obama's visit to Havana on Sunday . Cuba is the last major undeveloped market in the Caribbean .
 The former Philadelphia mayor and his wife, Lisa, were in Cuba visiting their daughter this week . President Barack Obama and his family visited Cuba on a historic diplomatic mission .
 The timing was mere coincidence, Nutter said Wednesday evening . Nutter was on a layover at Miami International Airport when the timing was coincidence .
 In 1959, Fidel Castro and his communist henchmen put a bullet through the head of freedom . Fidel Castro's death was the result of a bullet hole in the heart of freedom.
 Proclaiming the era of equality, they threw dissidents in jail or shot them, cracked down on free speech, closed their markets and seized private property . They also closed markets, closed private property and seized property, they say . Proclaimers of equality were 'throwing dissidents in
 Over the decades, hundreds of thousands of Cubans left the island any way they could . The island nation has been home to more than 1,000 Cubans .
 Learned men floated battered cars 90 miles toward Florida in the hope that they would reach land . Young women smuggled their babies into rickety old boats in the desperate desire to escape perennial servitude . Women smuggled babies into boats in desperate desire for escape .
 The president of the world's most powerful country, who refuses to identify ISIS by their own name, is the one and the same who made no mention at all about the nine Cubans who drowned in waves trying to make it to Florida while he was on the way .
 That the Obama family get away with masquerading as defenders of the world poor is an insult to human intelligence . The Obama family should not have masqueraded as defenders for the poor, says Julian Zelizer .
 The self-styled Obama blue-bloods actually flaunt their riches — paid for from the public purse — as touring royalty . Obama's wealth is paid for by the government, but it's paid for through the tax .
 Cubans wake up wondering how much will really change on the communist island . President Barack Obama broke decades of US-Cuba hostility on Wednesday .
 President Obama tells Cuban people the Communist revolution that brought the Castros to power was a "liberation movement,"" just like America's own revolution . President Obama says the Cuban revolution was a 'liberation' movement, just like his own .
 President Obama's open hand to the Castro brothers in Havana has been met with a clenched fist . President Obama met with an open hand in Havana, Cuba, Cuba .
 Cubans protesting the most repressive regime in the history of the Western Hemisphere have been beaten and abused in answer to the visit of the president, and on camera . Cubans protested the visit to the president of Cuba .
 Several thousand Cubans were thrown in jail on the eve of Mr Obama's arrival . Raul Castro added a pointed snub of protocol when he would not meet Mr Obama at the airport .
 President Obama spoke of a ""new day"" in Cuba Monday, but he chose to ignore the tragic and oppressive past decades of the old Castro regime . President Obama chose not to mention the tragic past decades .
 A ""new day"" in Cuba cannot be achieved when the old tyrannical guard still maintains absolute power over its subjugated people . A new 'new day' in Cuba can't be achieved in Cuba without the old guard still maintaining absolute power .
 Obama talked about engagement with the Cuban people, but the Cuban government only allows for strict engagement on their terms and with those who strictly follow and support their communist ideology and its repressive military . The Cuban government allows for only engagement on the terms .
 The president's utopian mentality fails to align itself with the realities of the Cuban people . Cuba's system and government has suffocated the freedoms of the people for decades, he says .
 Judicial Watch filed a Freedom of Information Act lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Defense to obtain records about American prisoners of war who may have been held captive by Cuba .
 The arrest of more than 50 anti-regime protestors just before President Obama landed in Cuba underscores the fact that the Castro regime is a tyranny . President Obama's visit to Cuba is scheduled to take place next week .
 Raul Castro scolds reporters for asking unscripted questions in public . This reality was also written all over the face of dictator Castro in his press conference with Obama .
 He's clearly not accustomed to such things — why should be he be, he and his brother Fidel got rid of them more than half a century ago . He and Fidel Castro are unlikely to become so any time soon, they say .
 Obama under fire for 'going to baseball games with the Castros' while Brussels burns . Obama is accused of going to 'baseball games' with Castros while Brussels is burning .
 Republicans are already criticizing President Obama for staying put in Cuba instead of coming home or flying to Belgium in the wake of the terrorist attacks this morning in Brussels .
 Ted Cruz is running for the Republican nomination for president, according to reports from ABC News' Rick Klein . Cruz is a Republican presidential candidate . Cruz has been a long-time presidential contender .
 President Barack Hussein Obama hit his lifetime apex yesterday by publicly groveling to the communist leader of Cuba . President Obama groveled to Cuba's communist leader yesterday .
 He publicly agreed with Raúl Castro that America is the most hateful member in a dying capitalist world . America is most responsible for the grinding poverty in Communism's only North American outpost .
 President Obama met with more than a dozen dissidents in Cuba on Tuesday . Some of the dissidents were arrested just before the meeting, including some who were arrested .
 Some dissidents who were able to attend the meeting reported being harassed by Cuban secret police on Monday . Some dissidents said they were harassed by secret police as they traveled to a silent protest .
 President Raul Castro denied that the communist nation holds any political prisoners . That happened just hours after President Castro denied there were political prisoners in the country .
 Smiling Obama ignores calls to cut short Cuban trip and attends baseball game . Obama attends game in Havana, Cuba, to attend baseball game.
 President Obama was all smiles as he watched an exhibition baseball game between the Tampa Bay Rays and the Cuban national baseball team . Hours after ISIS terrorists killed 34 people in Brussels, the president watched a game in honor of the victims .
 Obama ignored calls to cut short his historic trip to return to Washington and lead the response . Obama sat down with wife Michelle, daughters Sasha and Malia, and Cuban dictator Raul Castro . Obama appeared carefree as he enjoyed the game with the family .
 Obama gave a 15-minute interview to ESPN about the threat posed by ISIS . The president kept his $500 shades on throughout the spot .
 This week as part of his paper tiger legacy, Mr Obama is the first U.S. president to visit this present-day slave state since Calvin Coolidge in 1928 .
 As usual, Mr Obama will enjoy himself with his extended Cuban-background ""selfie"" celebration, but the human rights abuses continue unchanged .
 The current president is in Havana, posing in front of a mural of Che Guevara . Meanwhile, the current President is in Cuba, posing .
 President Obama has agreed with Raul Castro that America has a problem with income inequality . Obama has been accused of ignoring the problem of income inequality in America .
 Cuba is "in misery and being watched by the secret police," says President Obama . "I have been to Cuba, and except for the elites, every single citizen is in misery"
 This revolting spectacle in Cuba is yet another reminder we've got an enemy in the White House . It's not the first time we've seen a war of interest in Cuba .
 Obama becomes the first President to set foot in Cuba for Nine Decades . Obama is the first US President to visit Cuba in nine decades .
 The Obamas' tour of Old Havana was nearly a washout on Sunday evening as a deluge of rain came down minutes after they landed in Cuba . They are in Cuba for a historic three-day visit .
 The first family made their way to the Museo de la Ciudad, the museum of Cuba's capital city, and on to Havana Cathedral . They huddled under umbrellas as they walked through the Plaza des Armas .
 President Obama's family looked less than pleased as they perched underneath their blue and black umbrellas . Sasha Obama's daughter Sasha was also unhappy with the president's choice of umbrella .
 The Rolling Stones will play a free concert in Havana — the first open-air show there by a British rock band . President Obama will make the first trip to Cuba by an American president in almost 90 years .
 Tens of thousands of people say they're fleeing the island and saying gimme shelter to American immigration officials at Texas land ports . But changing times in the Communist country haven't stopped tens of thousands from fleeing .
 It was Obama, not Castro, who was desperate to make this trip happen . Castro does not respect Obama; and, not Obama, wants to make it happen . Obama was desperate for this trip to Cuba, but Castro was desperate, not for this .
 Cuban authorities arrested members of The Ladies in White, a prominent dissident group whose husbands are in jail for speaking out against the Communist regime . President Obama landed in Havana on Friday night .
 Give me a name, or names, or after this meeting is over you can give me a list of political prisoners . If we have those political prisoners they will be released before tonight ends, he says . Give him a name or names .
 President Obama mustered little more than a weak, "You know, I actually welcome President Castro commenting on some of the areas where he feels we're falling short," Obama said . But to watch him stand next to a doddering, pompous communist dictator going out of his way
 It is an island once rich in the faith, only to be annihilated by Fidel and Raul Castro and their war on religion . The island was rich in religion, but was annihilated in Cuba by the Castro brothers .
 Obama agrees with the Castros that America is the side that needs to be forgiven . Really, I'm sure that in his heart of hearts, Barack agrees with Castros .
 America is the aggressor, the sinner that stands in need of reparation . America's aggressor is America's sinner, needs to be reparation. America is a sinner needing reparation for its sins .
 Cuban authorities arrest more than 50 anti-government protesters just hours before Obama's plane lands in Cuba . Obama's three-day visit to Cuba is the first for a U.S. president in almost 90 years . The president's plane touched down in Cuba on Saturday morning .
 U.S. President Barack Obama arrives at Havana airport late Sunday afternoon . He was joined by his wife Michelle and daughters Malia and Sasha on board Air Force One .
 President Raul Castro is set to meet with President of Cuba later this week . He was greeted by some of the Cuban top officials, including Cuba's foreign minister and U.S. ambassador .
 On Sunday, Obama touched down in Havana, Cuba, becoming the first sitting U.S. president to visit Cuba since 1928 . Obama's visit was the first since 1928 to Cuba .
 On Monday, Obama drew controversy by standing in front of a giant mural of Che Guevara in Revolution Square . The mural features a portrait of the murderous Cuban revolutionary .
 He later held a joint press conference with Cuban dictator Raul Castro . Castro blasted the U.S. for its record on race and poverty . He demanded the return of the Guantanamo Bay naval base .
 Obama has asserted for months that normalizing relations with Cuba is a better way to effect human rights changes . Obama has said that Cuba's human rights needs to be improved .
 One of the leading voices against communism says Obama is simply giving cover to the Castros . The Castros are still in power in the U.S.
 For years, Cuban exiles in the U.S. dreamed that the island's longtime dictator would drop dead one day, ushering a transformational era of greater freedoms on the island . The island's citizens on both sides of the Florida straits are reconciled .
 President Obama visits the island, transfixing Cubans and resetting their expectations about the future . Castro is tucked away, out of sight and largely out of mind, as Obama visits .
 A once towering figure in hemispheric politics is gradually fading into irrelevance . He was once a towering figure, but is now fading in relevance . Heavily influential figure in the world's most powerful nations .
 President Obama posed for photographers in front of image of notorious Cuban revolutionary Che Guevara . President Obama was in Cuba during his presidential visit .
 Obama lays a wreath at the Jose Marti monument in Revolution Square . Obama stood with members of the American delegation to Cuba .
 The square also features an image of Camilo Cienfuegos, another revolutionary who fought with Fidel Castro .
 President Obama's visit to communist Cuba is no proud moment for America . Obama's "history-making" visit to Cuba is not a proud moment, says White House .
 Cuban police forcibly break up a pro-democracy demonstration and arrest several dozen activists . It comes hours before Barack Obama was to arrive in Havana . Obama is the first U.S. president to visit Cuba in 90 years .
 Protesters bundled into buses and police vans after a shouting match with pro-Castro supporters . The protesters were from the Damas de Blanco and other opposition groups . They had been demonstrating near the Santa Rita church .
 "The police were very violent,"" Glavys Fernández, the mother of leading opposition figure Antonio Rodiles, told the Guardian .
 Communist Havana has always been a magnet for the radical chic of the left, drawn like moths to the flame of this western outpost of totalitarian Communism . Havana is now an outpost of communist Cuba .
 Che Guevara received Jean-Paul Sartre's visit in the 1960s . Angela Davis and Stokely Carmichael were among those who visited Che Guesara .
 President Obama is expected to arrive in Cuba on Sunday to hang out with Raul Castro and his henchmen . Obama and a retinue of celebrities are expected to accompany him .
 President Obama has made it clear he won't be calling for regime change in Cuba . President Obama will travel to communist Cuba for the first time in 57 years .
 The trip will be little more than a U.S. endorsement of a detested military police state . So far, it will be a United States endorsement of the detested police state.
 Obama attacked for failing to reveal if he will publicly criticize Cuba and the Castros for harboring U.S. criminals . Obama also attacked for not saying if he would criticize Cuba or Cuba over harboring criminals .
 President Obama has been slammed for refusing to say whether he would talk to Cuban officials over the harboring of American fugitives . President Obama's historic trip to Cuba might be underway but he has refused to say if he will talk about harboring fugitives in Cuba .
 Several United States criminal have fled the United States and headed for Cuba to find refuge where they are allowed to live free lives . Several U.S. criminal have left the country to live a free life .
 Convicted killer Joanne Chesimard fled to Cuba after she was found guilty of shooting dead state trooper Werner Foerster in 1973 . She was convicted of killing a New Jersey state trooper and fleeing to Cuba in 1973.
 President Obama's visit to Cuba includes a meeting with Communist dictator Raul Castro . Administration officials have said human rights will be on the table during Obama's time there .
 The State Department's Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014, Cuba is an ""authoritarian state"" responsible for ongoing human rights abuses . Cuba is accused of being an 'authoritarian' state responsible for abuses .
 Cuban President Raul Castro tells President Obama the U.S. must return the Guantanamo Bay naval base and lift the embargo against Havana for normalizing relations . Castro says the United States must return Guantanamo Bay to Cuba for normalization of relations .
 He also said in order for the countries to move forward, ""it will also be necessary"" for the United States to return Guantanamo, which is based on the eastern end of Cuba .
 The White House won't say which dissidents President Obama plans to meet with during his historic visit to Cuba . It's unclear whether any dissidents will include prisoners the Castro regime is holding .
 Obama will arrive in Cuba on Sunday . The White House is putting off providing a list of dissidents it invited for a meeting with Obama . Obama will leave Cuba on Monday .
 White House press secretary Josh Earnest says he hasn't seen the list . Earnest said the administration plans to release the list at an unspecified time over the next few days .
 President Obama's outreach to communist-ruled Cuba risks "legitimizing the deeply entrenched Cuban regime," rights groups say . Obama is scheduled to become the first sitting president to visit Cuba in almost 90 years .
 President Obama's 'historic' rapprochement with brutal communist military regime has gone badly awry . The aim of a thaw with the brutal military regime that took power even before Obama was born, has gone awry.
 Obama stated he was normalizing relations with Cuba to improve conditions for Cubans . Obama stated that he would normalize relations with the country .
 Dissident arrests up dramatically to 8,616 in the year following normalization . Arrests up dramatically in year after normalization of regime .
 Business licenses fell by 10,000 in 2015, too, an advocacy group says . Business licenses also fell in Cuba in the last year, too .
 93,000 Cubans have flooded into the U.S. in the last two years, 26,000 in the past six months . They are mostly given a pass to stay in the United States, a border Democratic House member says .
 Henry Cuellar urged the director of Immigration and Customs Enforcement to try to stop the flood before the Cubans reach the border . The hearing was held at a House Appropriations subcommittee hearing .
 Elizardo Sanchez, an anti-government activist, chronicles political detentions month-to-month . He says he and most of those invited planned to defy the government order .
 U.S. officials are offering to help activists get to the meeting with Obama, Sanchez says . Sanchez: United States officials offer to help those who want to meet Obama .
 President Obama flies to Havana Sunday to cozy up to the Castros . He'll take off from a runway other than the Constitution . President Obama will take off Sunday from Havana .
 He'll be violating the letter and spirit of congressional statute, too, too . He'll violate the letter, spirit of Congress, too. He'll also violate the spirit of the law .
 Mr Obama's effort to make Communist Cuba a central part of his legacy . This is one of the underappreciated features of the president's efforts to make the island nation a model of Cuba .
 Even against his record on Iran, it's hard to think of a foreign policy adventure quite like it . The president has been criticized for his foreign policy policy on Iran .
 On the one hand, the President is taking along corporate executives in an effort to "kick start" a business relationship . On the other hand, he is trying to kick start a new relationship with the U.S.
 Cuba has no intention of changing its policies in exchange for normal relations with the United States . Cuba said it would welcome President Barack Obama to Havana later this month . Cuba says it will welcome President Obama to Cuba this month but has no plans to change its policies .
 President Obama's 'historic' trip to communist Cuba is showing signs of falling apart . Obama's "historic" trip to Cuba has taken place in Cuba . President Obama is expected to make a stop in Havana .
 Far from the beisbol and mojitos junket that the president's PR team is selling, disputes are all over, starting with which dissidents the regime will let the president see . The president's team is trying to sell a PR junket, but disputes are over .
 Nothing is more embarrassing than watching a suitor pursuing unrequited love . Nothing more embarrassing to watch than that suitor pursue love .
 President Obama has removed Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism, re-established diplomatic relations and opened an embassy in Havana . He will be the first American president to visit Cuba in nearly 90 years .
 The back and forth over human rights is another sign of how prickly U.S.-Cuba relations remain . Despite the easing of many travel and trade restrictions, over the last year, tensions remain .
 Obama's planned overnight visit on March 21 will be the first by a sitting president in nearly 90 years . It also highlights a potential problem for Obama's scheduled overnight visit to the former Cold War adversary .
 United States Pays to Feed and Shelter Cuban Migrants Stranded in Costa Rica . United States pays to feed and shelter Cubans stranded on Costa Rica island .
 The U.S. government has been paying to feed and shelter thousands of Cubans trying to migrate to the United States . Critics say it's another sign of the lopsided treatment provided to Cubans under American law .
 The Obama administration has tried hard to deter the crush of migrants arriving from Central America in recent years .
 The U.S. has pressed Mexico to crack down on migrants passing through its territory . Women and children who managed to cross the American border have been held in detention facilities .
 Honduran, Salvadoran and Guatemalan refugees are arrested, detained and deported if they fail to make the case that they have a ""credible fear"" of persecution if returned home . Honduras, Guatemala, Honduras and Guatemala are among the countries where refugees are often arrested and deported .
 Some have temporary permission to stay as their cases are sorted out . Some can, ensuring temporary permission for them to stay in the UK .
 Every fleeing Cuban who gets to the U.S. is put on a fast-track to legal residency, thanks to the Cuban Adjustment Act . The act was last amended in 1996, and it was last updated in 1996 .
 The Cuban capital is Cuba's second largest city, Havana . The city has been in ruins since the Soviet-era Soviet Union ended in 1968 .
 While there are obvious disadvantages to economic stagnation, I figured that it would have at least created a charming-looking city .
 There are a handful of U.S. cities, and numerous European ones, that have resisted growth, modernization, and the automobile, only to remain quaint .
 It didn't take even a 10-minute cab ride from the airport to realize that my assumption about Havana had been naïve . Even if it is still held by many of the city's blissfully incurious tourists, it's not surprising to find out .
 Everything in the city is merely old, and because little gets produced, nothing is replaced . Instead of replacing everything, the city's residents are merely old . The city has a history of producing, producing and replacing, but not producing .
 While exploring Havana's neighborhoods, the thing that jumped out was not the city's poverty, but its scarcity . Havana's scarcity of food and water has been a problem for some of its residents .
 Cuba's government does not value or comprehend mass production . There are shortages of everything, including food and medicine . The government doesn't value mass production, not for agriculture .
 In the United States, we take for granted that any basic convenience is but a short drive away . In the U.S. we take to granted that such convenience is just a short distance from our home .
 Even if they did all have cars, there would still be few outside options for them . So they must stick to neighborhood stores with minimal inventory .
 Obama's 16-month engagement with the Castro-Family-Crime-Syndicate marvels . Obama's relationship with the family and friends of the Castro family is one of the world's greatest achievements .
 Never in the course of U.S. diplomacy has so much been surrendered by so many to so few for so little, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Not a penny of the $7 billion Castro stole at gunpoint from Americans has been compensated or acknowledged . Castro stole the money he stole from the U.S. in the 1970s .
 Some of the FBI's most wanted terrorists still live like celebrities in Cuba . The FBI says it's not surprising that some of the most wanted terror suspects still live in Cuba.
 Castro promptly got his murdering terrorists back as a bonus to an economic lifeline from Obama . All this is in the nick of time and much of it at the expense of the United States taxpayer .
 Washington's Public Schools System is looking to Cuba for lessons to improve literacy in the nation's capital . Cuba's literacy program aims to help improve literacy .
 Mayor Muriel Bowser and Schools Chancellor Kaya Henderson have toured several schools in Havana . Havana boasts a 99.8 percent literacy rate .
 Cuban school kids who don't do their school work, sleep in class, attack teachers, cheat on tests with cell phones, sell drugs on campus, and let their pants drop down to their knees . Instead of concentrating on literacy per se, they should find out what happens to Cuban school
 President Obama will not visit the troops stationed at Guantánamo Bay Naval Base . Obama will visit the base as part of his coming trip to Cuba . The president will also make a stop at the base .
 Mr Obama has not once visited the base, which staffs thousands of U.S. service members, during his tenure as President .
 Ben Rhodes, the President's Deputy National Security Advisor, discussed his upcoming trip to Cuba . He said he will forgo American troops for the dictatorship in Havana . Rhodes said the trip will be the first of his kind in Cuba .
 President Barack Obama will be the first U.S. President to visit Cuba in over 80 years . The White House announced on Thursday that Obama will make history as he will visit Cuba . President Obama will travel to Cuba for the first time in 80 years.
 The state visit is a direct continuation of the Obama's historic achievement from last year when he initiated diplomatic relations between the two countries . The visit comes a year after the president opened diplomatic relations with the US .
 The President announced the news via his Twitter account on the same day . "14 months ago, I announced that we would begin normalizing relations with Cuba," he tweeted .
 Obama is expected to meet with Cuban President Raul Castro, as well as various entrepreneurs and VIPs of Cuban society . It is expected that Obama will meet with Raul and other leaders .
 President Obama says he and the first lady will visit communist Cuba to help improve the lot of the Cuban people . Announcing another historic ""first,"" President Obama said he and first lady would visit Cuba .
 No regime has been showered with goodies the way the White House has heaped them onto the Castro brothers' 57-year military dictatorship . Castro brothers have been a military dictatorship for decades .
 From cash and trade, the Castros have made out like bandits . From cash, trade, to the prestige of a costly U.S. presidential visit, they've made out . The Castros are making it out of the United States with a $1.2 billion dollar dollar
 President Obama is planning a trip to Cuba some time next month, sources say . It will be the first time in more than 80 years a sitting U.S. president will visit Cuba .
 A National Security Council official plans to make the announcement tomorrow at the White House briefing . The announcement will be made at a White House press briefing .
 The move comes roughly 15 months after the president's pledge with Raul Castro to reopen diplomatic channels . The move follows a prisoner exchange and the release of United States contractor Alan Gross in December .
 The network morning shows glee over the White House announcing President Obama will travel to Cuba in March . The networks morning shows were beside themselves with glee on Thursday .
 ABC's Good Morning America went the extra mile by proclaiming the President was more popular than singer Beyonce on the island nation .
 Removed Cuba from Terrorist List after Hezbollah Opened Base on Island . Hezbollah opened base on the island in 2007 .
 A few years before the Obama administration removed Cuba from the U.S. list of nations that sponsor terrorism, Hezbollah established an operational base on the communist island, according to intelligence from Hillary Clinton .
 The information comes straight from electronic mail released by the State Department over the weekend . It's part of ongoing litigation surrounding Clinton's use of a private server to send classified information .
 This alarming information has been ignored by the mainstream media, which served as the president's most vocal cheerleader when he established diplomatic ties with Cuba last summer . The mainstream media has ignored this alarming information .
 After decades on the U.S. government's list of nations that sponsor terrorism, the Obama administration removed it to lay the groundwork for a full renewal of diplomatic ties . The Obama administration officially removed it from the list of countries sponsoring terrorism .
 They are crossing the border here by the hundreds each day, approved to enter the U.S. in a matter of hours . They are entering the United States by hundreds of hours each day .
 The friendly reception given the Cubans is an artifact of hostile relations with the Castro government . Central American families fleeing violence in their countries are treated differently in Cuba .
 The missile was sent to Europe for training but inadvertently shipped to Cuba, a State Department official says . The missile has been returned to the Cuban government .
 Whether it is a failure, of course, depends on what you think Obama was trying to achieve . Obama has been criticized for his lack of transparency .
 At least 7,000 Cuban refugees are expected to come to the border in the next coming days . The border is expected to be open to Cubans .
 More than 8,000 Cubans who had been stranded in Central America for months have begun arriving in the U.S. The Costa Rican government says the Cubans are now in the United States . The Cubans had been stuck in Central American limbo for months .
 The number of Cubans fleeing the country increased 78 percent from 24,278 in 2014 to 43,159 in FY 2015 . U.S. Customs and Border Protection: Cubans fled the country last year .
 The jump was the result of Cubans who fear the Obama administration might end its current ""wet-foot, dry-foot"" immigration policy . The policy allows any Cuban who reaches the U.S. the right to stay and receive welfare benefits .
 A U.S. Hellfire anti-tank missile found its way into the hands of Cuba's government in 2014 . The missile was launched from Predator drones in anti-terrorism operations, among other uses .
 Front-line U.S. military equipment made it to Havana, Cuba, or beyond . But the route it took, twice crossing the Atlantic, was less mysterious than the United States' response .
 Transfer out of Costa Rica of Cuban migrants headed to U.S. begins . Cuban migrants are headed to the United States . Cubans have been in Costa Rica for years .
 Cuban migrants stranded in Costa Rica since November take off from Liberia late Tuesday night . The first flight of Cuban migrants took off from the country's Daniel Oduber airport in the northern city of Liberia .
 As many as 8,000 Cubans trying to get to the U.S. have been in makeshift refugee camps in Costa Rica for two months . Nicaragua closed its border to them after a decision by closing the border to Cubans .
 "The Castros remain firmly in power, and we are not helping the opposition," says the government . The Castros are still firmly in control of the country, he says .
 The Cuban regime continues to arrest thousands of political dissidents, to cozy up to enemies like Iran and North Korea, and to carry out provocative acts such as stealing a U.S. Hellfire missile .
 Add to that list Iran, Hezbollah and a long litany of other U.S. enemies . Add to the list of other United States enemies .
 Thousands of Cubans flee Castro over fears U.S. open-door policy will end but are now stuck in Central America . Thousands of Cuban refugees are stuck in the region .
 Thousands of Cubans are caught in a new refugee crisis triggered by President Obama's moves towards ending the embargo on the country, Daily Mail Online can reveal .
 As many as 8,000 are living in squalor in Costa Rica where their attempts to reach the U.S. have stalled . Costa Rica is facing a growing humanitarian crisis over their presence .
 Cubans are trying to get to the U.S. land border with Mexico . They will be able to claim refugee status in America, and a rapid path to citizenship . The Cubans want to get into the United States land border .
 Thousands have fled the Communist country since Obama and Raul Castro last year ended more than 60 years of frozen relations . Thousands of people have fled since the Obama-Castro relations with Cuba ended last year .
 The White House says President Obama will likely visit Cuba this year . Obama is looking for a legacy and Latino votes for Democrats, the White House said .
 So far from this being about U.S. interests or even Cuban liberty, it's just another ego trip . So far, this is not about United States interests or Cuban liberty .
 Emanuel says location of family vacation should remain private in middle of controversy . Emanuel: "How on Earth could have thought that the location of his family vacation would remain private?"
 Raúl Castro urges U.S. to end broadcasts aimed at Cuba amid diplomatic thaw . Castro urges United States to end broadcasting aimed at Cuban dissidents .
 Cuban President Raúl Castro urges U.S. government to halt radio and television broadcasts aimed at Cuba . Castro reiterates that he is interested in deepening the thaw in relations with the United States . Cuba considers radio broadcasts that Cuba considers harmful harmful .
 President Obama urges Congress to lift Cuba embargo on first anniversary of rapprochement . Obama calls it a legacy of a failed policy . U.S.-Cuba relations have improved in recent years .
 The United States and Cuba are close to a deal on restoring regularly scheduled commercial flights, Cuban and American officials say . The deal comes on the eve of the 50th anniversary of detente between the Cold War foes .
 The diplomatic advance would help open the way for U.S. airlines to begin flying to Cuba within months . It would likely be the biggest step toward tighter economic ties since normalizing relations last year .
 Officials on both sides hope to reach a formal deal within hours or days . Officials say they have reached an understanding on key points and hope to make a formal announcement .
 Cuba Begins to Re-Imprison Political Dissidents 'Freed' under Obama Deal . Cuba begins to re-imprison political dissidents "Freed" under Obama deal .
 Cuba announced the release of this prisoners of conscience on January 12, though the government did not give out a list of names . Cuba did not release the names of the prisoners .
 The prisoners were allegedly released gradually in the month before, following President Obama's announcement that he would seek to warm relations between the United States and the rogue regime .
 Fox News reports that two of the 53 dissidents have been arrested again . Fox News reported that two dissidents had been arrested once again .
 Dissident group Ladies in White called for different opposition groups to join together in the ""We're All Marching" initiative . Only four women and one man from that group were able to get there, EFE learned .
 Several dissidents shouted ""Long live human rights"" and ""Freedom for the Cuban people" Upon their arrival at the planned site of the protest, the dissidents were immediately arrested by police as well as having insults such as ""worms" and ""mercenaries" hurled at them by government supports
 Tiny Nicaragua is All That Stands Between the U.S., Cuba And A Terrorist Mariel Rush . It's a tiny island nation that's all that stands between U.N. and Cuba . The country is home to the largest island in Latin America .
 In any normal nation, leaders would be ashamed if large numbers of their nationals found the country they live in so unbearable, their only wish is to leave . Leaders would be embarrassed if large number of their citizens found the situation so unbearable that they left the country .
 It lies about its colossal socialist failures and blames it all on Uncle Sam . The U.S. has been in the midst of a series of scandals, including the 2008-2008 election .
 There are signs the communist country is encouraging great waves of Cubans to illegally migrate to America . Now there are signs that Cubans are being encouraged to illegally enter the U.S.
 New wave of Cuban immigrants reaches U.S. but through Texas, not Florida . The new wave of immigrants comes to the United States through Texas and Texas .
 The number of Cubans arriving at the southern border increased this year after President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro announced plans to normalize relations . Many Cubans fear that could mean the end of the special status that allows them to stay and work here legally if they reach U.S
 Evidence of Havana's manipulation can clearly be seen in the magnitude of refugee flows . Evidence of Cuban influence can be clearly seen in refugee flows from Havana . Havana's influence is clearly evident in the refugee flows, according to reports .
 Cuba is a totalitarian police state, where people are not even allowed to move from house to another without the government's approval . Cuba is now a totalitarian state, with people not allowed to leave their homes without approval .
 Cuban migration has skyrocketed on fears that the wet-foot, dry-foot policy will end soon . Cuban migration is soaring on fears of the end of the wet foot, dry foot policy .
 Most Cubans these days are ferried migrants rather than actual exiles, it's time to end it now or face another Mariel . Given that most Cubans now don't have to be ferried out of the country, it is time to stop it .
 Yoenis Cespedes decided in 2011 that he wanted to leave Cuba to play baseball in the United States . Dozens of Cuban baseball players have done the same thing since the Castro government came to power more than 50 years ago . The Mets' slugging outfielder is one of dozens of
 Mr Cespedes and 10 members of his family fled the island in the middle of the night on a small boat . Risking arrest as well as their lives, the family fled on small boat on the night .
 Since the 1970s, the birthrate has been in free fall, tilting population figures into decline . The problem is more common in rich, industrialized nations, not poor ones . The birthrate is in a free fall in industrialized nations .
 Chris Christie wants the bistate agency that controls the state's airports to reject any efforts to launch flight service between Newark and Cuba . Christie wants a woman convicted of killing a state trooper is returned to the U.S.
 Cuban street artist known as El Sexto was freed Tuesday after 10 months behind bars . He had tried to set free two pigs painted with the names of the country's highest leaders .
 Bernie Sanders made favorable statements about Cuban dictator Fidel Castro when he was mayor of Burlington, Vermont . Sanders was mayor during that time .
 The statements took place during an interview on the CCTV Center for Media & Democracy's Channel 17/ Town Meeting Television, Chittenden County's local government access station .
 Castro regime cranking up the goon squads overtime to beat and jail dissidents . The result has been the opposite, with more repression of dissidents .
 Some 6,000 arrests have been announced since the opening, hardly a sign of a more open Cuba leading to a freer Cuba . Cuba has been accused of corruption in the past by the Cuban government .
 More Cubans are coming to Florida in their golden years to retire, able to tap U.S. government assistance . They never lived or worked here, but can tap United States government assistance even though they never worked or worked .
 The number of Cubans arriving over the age of 60 grew fivefold since 2010, according to state refugee data . Cubans over 60s arriving in Cuba have grown fivefold in the past five years, state data shows .
 Cubans qualify immediately for food stamps and Medicaid . Unlike most other immigrants, Cubans are able to qualify for Medicaid and food stamps .
 Cuban Dictator Castro Thanks United States With Insults And Grievances . Castro thanks U.S. for support of Castro's government . Castro has been in power since 1961 .
 From Oct. 1, 2014, to Aug. 31, 2015, a total of 36,497 Cubans arrived . During the 2014 fiscal year there were 22,162 Cubans in the country .
 The streets of eastern Holgu'n, Cuba, have been flooded with homeless people that residents say had ""disappeared as if by magic"" in the week before the Pope's arrival .
 Independent journalist Yusnaby Pérez has published a report from Holgu'n . The city is typically home to a significant number of homeless beggars .
 Most of the homeless were taken away by state police, though there is no evidence of where they were hidden until the Pope left the country . Most of these homeless were removed from the Pope's residence .
 The pope is spending four days in a country whose Communist dictatorship has remained unrelenting in its repression of free speech, political dissent and other human rights . Despite a warming of relations with the Vatican and the United States, relations with Russia and the Vatican have warmed .
 By the end of his third day, the pope had said or done nothing that might discomfit his official hosts . The pope had not said or did anything to discomfy his hosts .
 Pope Francis met with 89-year-old Fidel Castro, who holds no office in Cuba, but not with any members of the dissident community — in or outside of prison . Pope Francis also met with Fidel Castro but not members of Cuba's dissidents .
 The Castro regime showed its worst face on the arrival of Pope Francis in Cuba, hauling out its goons and showing how risky this papal visit is to the Marxist dictatorship . Castro regime shows how risky it is to Pope Francis .
 Some 60 dissidents were arrested and beaten across Cuba by security agents . Security agents beat dissidents across the country by security forces . 60 dissidents arrested across Cuba .
 Wanting to attend Mass with the visiting pontiff, who had reached out to them with formal invitations, had been invited by the pontiff . Wanting attending Mass with Pope Francis, they say they were invited to a formal Mass .
 The Obama administration may allow the U.N. to condemn America's economic embargo against Cuba without a fight . The move could increase pressure on Congress to end the 54-year-old restrictions .
 U.S. announces sweeping changes easing restrictions on business, travel to Cuba . Cuba has long been a source of tension in the region of the island nation . Cuba is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 The U.S. Departments Treasury and Commerce issued new regulations on Friday easing restrictions on Americans travelling to and doing business in Cuba . The new regulations further ease restrictions on American travel to Cuba .
 U.S. companies will be able to open offices on the island and engage in joint business ventures there . Individuals with relatives in Cuba will have more travel opportunities for people . The limit to the amount of money that can be sent people on Cuba are being eliminated .
 The new rules go into effect on Monday, September 21st, are the latest steps taken by the White House and President Barack Obama to weaken the U.S. trade embargo .
 President Obama eased some trade and travel restrictions with Cuba on Friday . White House: "The importance of the U.S. and Cuba re-establishing diplomatic ties" Obama said .
 The opposition Human Rights and National Reconciliation Commission said Friday that the Cuban government has rounded up thousands of beggars and indigents as part of a ""social cleansing"" operation . Pope Francis's visit to the island is scheduled to take place on Sunday .
 The government wants such people out of sight of pilgrims, foreign journalists and other visitors . The papal visit is scheduled for Saturday .
 Barack Obama speaks with Raul Castro as United States eases travel restrictions with Cuba . U.S. eases restrictions on travel to Cuba for the first time since Cuba was isolated in Cuba .
 The United States further eased restrictions on business and travel with Cuba on Friday . The U.S. eased restrictions Friday as it presses forward in rebuilding long-frozen relations with its former Cold War foe .
 The U.S. made it easier for Americans to establish and operate businesses in Cuba in July . The United States removed remittance limits and widened travel opportunities to the Caribbean island nation .
 Obama Urges U.S. Businessmen to Exert Pressure for Lifting Cuba Embargo . Obama calls for lifting Cuba embargo . Obama urges businesses to lobby for lifting of embargo .
 President Barack Obama urges businessmen to pressure Congress to lift the Cuban embargo . Obama emphasizes the ""significant economic opportunities" created by the process of normalizing bilateral relations .
 Pope Francis' imminent visit to Cuba will be an opportunity to broaden the ""conversations"" that are already occurring on the communist island . Obama also said that the imminent visit of Pope Francis will be ""an opportunity""
 Pope Benedict XVI visited in 2012, nearly 3,100 were let go from Castro's dungeons . Nearly 3,000 people were released from the dungeons .
 Raul Castro decides who stays jailed and who goes free — at the flick of a hand . Like a Roman prefect, Cuban generalissimo Raul . Castro is a dictator of the island nation .
 Hard to think of any time when it's ever been rosier for the Castro brothers in their 56 years as absolute overlords of Cuba . The Castro brothers have ruled Cuba for 56 years .
 In the rubble of their failed communist system, President Obama has extended normal relations . Obama has asked nothing in return .
 Pope Francis is paying a visit to Cuba this month, complete with a mass to be held under the image of Che Guevara .
 At least 20 U.S. congressional delegations have been paying tribute to the Castro's revolution .
 Tourists from the United States are rolling in, too, legal or not, fattening the coffers of the Cuban military that runs the hotels . The U.S. government says it's not illegal to bring in tourists to Cuba .
 Chilean congressman reports being beaten, arrested during 'Ladies in White' protest in Cuba . Chilean congressman says he was beaten and arrested during protest .
 Chilean congressman says he was beaten, handcuffed and held for nearly three hours by Cuban authorities . He was participating in a peaceful demonstration by the Ladies in White dissident organization in Havana .
 Fidel and Raul Castro turned against the Church by declaring Cuba an atheist state . They chased out priests and shut down religious schools after seizing power in the 1959 revolution . The Castro brothers were Roman Catholics and educated by Jesuits .
 American flag was raised over the reopened embassy in Havana last month . Obama administration plans to significantly ease travel restrictions by the end of 2015 . Americans are looking to see what they've been missing for more than 50 years .
 My father's killer roams free in Cuba, harbored by Mr Obama's new friends . The killer is believed to be in the hands of the Cuban government .
 The United States embassy in Havana opened for the first time in 54 years . With much fanfare, the U.S. embassy in Cuba opened with the help of Cuban diplomats .
 Instead of Kerry demanding Cuba returns fugitives from U.S. justice, the Obama administration unilaterally handed legitimacy to a regime that has sponsored terrorists for half a century . Cuba has even today harbors convicted terrorist fugitives including BLA cop killer Joanne Chesimard and William Morales .
 Morales' Armed Forces for National Liberation murdered Frank Connor . Frank Connor's father Frank Connor was killed by Morales' armed forces . Morales killed Frank Connor in Morales' war of terror .
 Travel to Cuba could soon be nearly as easy as travel to any other part of the world . Cuba has been a source of inspiration for travel to the island nation for decades .
 The Obama administration plans to unilaterally ease travel restrictions to Cuba, sources say . Sources say the Obama administration is moving to ease the travel restrictions .
 The new measures would bypass limits on travel imposed by Congress by changing regulations at the executive level . They would bypass travel restrictions imposed by the president and bypass them by changing rules at executive levels .
 If future generations have to rely on the musings and disinformation transmitted by the national media, they will be ill-informed . If all those future generations must rely on for a complete and accurate picture of the life of Julian Bond are the .
 Missing from eulogies following his death was any mention of Bond's trips to Cuba to celebrate the communist takeover in 1959, and then again again in 2006, to confirm his initial suspicions .
 Secretary of State John Kerry presided over the re-opening of the U.S. Embassy in Havana, Cuba, on Aug. 14 .
 The occasion marked the culmination of nearly two years of quiet diplomacy between the White House and the Castro regime . The White House has been involved in the Cuban regime for two years .
 Secretary of State Kerry traveled to Havana last week to raise the flag at the U.S. Embassy there last week . Kerry raised the flag last week at the Cuban capital .
 As has been noted here in this blog and in many news articles and columns, no dissidents or human rights activists were invited to the ceremony . The ceremony was held in honor of President Barack Obama .
 The fear would be that it expresses a lack of interest in how the Castro regime treats those struggling peacefully for democracy and human rights in Cuba .
 Castro Inc. has made it possible for the family to stay in power, Castro says . Castro has made the family, and Castro Inc., Inc. Inc., stay in control, he says .
 Not bad for Ra਀l Castro, a man drowning last fall but now firmly in control after the Obama lifeline . Castro is now in control of the Cuban government .
 Secretary of State John Kerry says he feels "very much at home" in Cuba . Kerry attended the flag-raising ceremony at the U.S. embassy in Cuba on Friday .
 With the raising of the Stars and Stripes over a new embassy in Havana, the U.S. becomes merely one of the herd, its leaders talking only to each other in the crony-like coziness of the world's ruling classes . Only lip service paid to their
 Kerry and his media toadies might have touted Friday's embassy opening as a new era . Kerry's media toady may have touted opening as new era of diplomacy .
 Cuba's Repression Pushed 24,000 to risk trip to United States in eight months . Cuba's government has been cracking down on Cuba's human rights abuses .
 23,978 Cuban refugees arrived in the United States between October 2014 and May 2015 . Another 3,564 Cubans attempted and failed to reach U.S. shores .
 Most of those arriving successfully crossed the southern border with Mexico or crossed the straits of the Caribbean separating Florida from Cuba . Most of the migrants crossed the Florida border or Florida's straits separating Cuba from Florida .
 The U.S. flag is up at the new embassy in Havana, Cuba . The United States is back in Cuba .
 It was a very nice building on Malecón Drive, the avenue around Havana Bay, Cuba . It was the address of Havana Bay .
 As a naturalized U.S. citizen born in Cuba, I was open to negotiations with the Castro regime . I was born in the island, and I was uniquely aware of the tragedy there, he says .
 In other words, I was open to a conversation — not the monologue that has taken us to this post . "I'm open to conversation," I said, "I was open ... to a discussion"
 Fidel Castro insists the U.S. owes Cuba millions of dollars . Castro says the embargo is a result of the half-century-old American trade embargo . Castro: "The United States owes Cuba 'many millions'
 Fidel Castro kicked off his long-sought U.S. embassy opening by announcing that we owe Cuba millions in reparations . Fidel Castro said that the United States owed Cuba millions of dollars in reparation .
 Lois and Roy Schechter's life in Cuba ended at gunpoint when Fidel Castro's soldiers barred them from their 13,000-acre farm . Fidel Castro soldiers barred the Schechters from their farm in Cuba . Lois, Roy and Roy were forced to leave the farm at gun
 The communist government seized property from the wealthy including hundreds of Americans . Hundreds of Americans were taken from their homes by the government .
 The Schechter's had been on the island for 60 years and lived in a 17 room home . They had lived in the 17-room home for more than 60 years .
 It is now in a guarded diplomatic enclave, and occupied by Chinese officials .
 Cuban dissidents not invited to United States embassy flag ceremony in Havana . U.S. Embassy flag ceremony to be held in Havana, Cuba, Havana .
 Cuban dissidents will not be invited to the United States embassy flag-raising ceremony in Havana . The ceremony will be attended by representatives from both governments including Secretary of State Kerry .
 Secretary of State John Forbes Kerry will be in Havana this morning for the raising of the Stars and Stripes over the newly reopened American embassy . Kerry will attend the ceremony .
 The only way it could possibly be sweeter for America's Gigolo would be if he were lowering the flag, followed by a hasty flight off the embassy roof with the United States ambassador in military helicopter .
 It's always been Liveshot's fondest dream to some day unconditionally surrender to a Third-World Communist dictator — and now it's finally reality . Liveshot: "It was always been a dream to unapologetically surrender to the Third World dictator"
 Cuban security forces round up 50 with the Ladies in White dissident group and around 40 other activists . Some activists wore masks with the image of U.S. President Barack Obama, AFP reports .
 The decision to suspend the celebration comes from ""the need to increase the hygiene and sanitary campaign to palliate the complex epidemiological situation in the municipality,"" Ahora newspaper said .
 President Obama overruled experts to remove Cuba, others from human trafficking list . Obama officials overruled expert's advice to remove the list from Cuba .
 The 2015 U.S. report on human trafficking has come under fire amid allegations that senior State Department officials ignored experts' recommendations . Cuba and Malaysia were taken off its blacklist of countries failing to combat modern-day slavery .
 U.S. State Department forced to inflate assessments of 14 strategically important countries in Trafficking in Persons report, Reuters investigation finds . State Department officials also forced into inflating assessments of countries in this year's report .
 It's not enough that Washington has made a deal with a bankrupt regime, throwing them a life line of support just when their last sugar daddy, Hugo Chavez of Venezuela has gone to his just reward and his heirs can no longer afford to give the Cubans oil .
 Raul Castro, the aging dictator-in-chief once removed, was throwing new political prisoners in jail . Castro was concluding a deal with President Obama at the time of the deal .
 Cuba is emerging as a destination for the LGBT community . A travel agency specializing in packages for those customers is already in operation in Cuba .
 Hillary Clinton will ask Congress to lift the embargo on Cuba during a scheduled visit to South Florida . Clinton will participate in two public events, her campaign office says .
 Dissidents are still sent to jail, but they don't spend as much time there . Dissidents still spend most of their time in prison, but not as much as in jail .
 Instead they are released earlier and sent home to live under total surveillance . Instead they were sent home with total surveillance instead of being released .
 "The nature of the regime hasn't changed an iota. It's an improvement, I guess, but the nature of it hasn't been changed," he says .
 It's not going to change as part of American-Cuban normalization, either . The relationship between the U.S. and Cuba has been strained for years .
 The United States normalized relations with Vietnam despite the lack of political freedom there . The U.S. normalized relations relations with China back when Mao was still in charge .
 Nothing bad happened to the U.S. because of it, and nothing bad will happen to the United States as a result of normalizing relations with Cuba, President Obama says . Obama: "Nothing bad happened" to Cuba because of the normalization of relations .
 Normalizing relations with Cuba isn't being done for the benefit of the U.S., it is for Cuba's benefit, says CNN's John Sutter . Cuba's Cuba-hating socialist president, he says, is doing it for the Cuban people . Sutter: Normalizing
 Even if it is true that ""nothing bad will happen"" to us after lifting trade and travel restrictions, it isn't about us . It's a dubious claim at best that it won't happen to us. It's not about us, it's about us.
 Police in New Mexico hope diplomatic thaw ends cop killer's Cuban exile . New Mexico cop killer killed cop killer in Cuban exile in 1990s .
 Charlie Hill, now 65, is one of an estimated 70 fugitives who escaped U.S. justice by fleeing to Cuba . New Mexico State Police commander Pete Kassetas says he is willing to fly him back to face the music .
 Hill was one of three black militants who killed a state trooper in 1971, in a case similar to that of the better-known Joanne Chesimard . Hill was a member of the group who killed the trooper in a similar case .
 Secretive White House meeting reveals Obama's plan to visit Cuba in 2016 . Obama's visit to Cuba is scheduled to take place in 2016.
 A secretive White House meeting on Cuba last week revealed that President Obama plans to visit the island nation early next year . The meeting also discussed the controversial idea of the Cuban government opening consular offices in Miami .
 The White House held an off-schedule, private meeting on Thursday with U.S. officials involved in the administration's Cuba policy . After hailing embassy openings in Washington and Havana last week, the White House met with Cuban officials .
 Nearly 80 activist members of the Cuban-American community from Florida and across the United States — mostly Democrats — were also there . Nearly 80 activists from Florida, across the U.S. were also attending .
 Cuba tones down anti-U.S. rhetoric on revolution's main holiday . Cuba has a long history of anti-American rhetoric . Cuba's anti-Cuba rhetoric has been criticized in recent months .
 Cuba's first national holiday since re-establishing diplomatic relations with the United States on July 20 . Cuban leaders pledged to keep socialism alive but toned down the anti-U.S. rhetoric .
 GOP-controlled Senate panel votes to lift a decades-long ban on travel to Cuba . The vote is a boost to President Barack Obama's moves to ease travel restrictions and open up relations with the Castro-governed nation .
 The political activists died in a car crash in Cuba's eastern Granma province on July 22, 2012, under controversial circumstances . They were both members of the Christian Liberation Movement .
 The Times has fronted for the Castro regime for a half-century and counting . As to the latter, the Times has been fronting for the regime for 50 years .
 A Human Rights Foundation report says evidence suggests the Cuban government is responsible for Paya's death . Oswaldo Paya was a Cuban dissident leader who was killed by government forces .
 The report comes on the third anniversary of Paya's death in a car crash . The report was compiled by lawyers for a non-governmental human rights group .
 Cuban-American lawmakers criticized the Cuban government for subjecting many of its people to starvation conditions . Fidel Castro's son Antonio gets to live the life of a playboy during a Mediterranean Sea vacation .
 Antonio Castro is seen hanging out with friends on a yacht and in a posh hotel in Turkey . The lawmakers were reacting to recent reports that show Antonio Castro partying with friends .
 Secretary of State John Kerry will visit Havana on August 14 to inaugurate the first U.S. embassy in Cuba in 54 years . Kerry will be the first American to visit Cuba since 1961 .
 President Obama has begun a relationship with the brutal regime in Syria . That's some relationship President Obama's begun with brutal regime . Obama's relationship with Assad regime has begun with Iran .
 Former ambassadors, murderous guerrilla icons, and even folk singers have descended upon Washington, D.C. to celebrate the raising of the Cuban flag over the newly-minted embassy .
 Cuban state media is treating the event as a victory over the American people . The event, which has no analog at the American embassy in Havana, is a victory for the U.S.
 More than a half century of Cold War and lingering enmity came to an abrupt but quiet end on Monday . U.S. and Cuba restored full diplomatic relations Monday .
 Agreement to resume normal ties on July 20 came into force just after midnight Sunday . Diplomatic missions of each country were upgraded from interests sections to embassies . The new era began with little fanfare when the agreement was reached .
 The United States and Cuba restored full diplomatic relations on Monday . The U.S. opened embassies that have been shuttered since 1961 . The two countries restored diplomatic relations .
 Kerry's trip to Havana will be the first for a U.S. secretary of state since 1945, CNN reports . Kerry's visit to Havana is the first since 1945 .
 The State Department will hang the Cuban flag in the lobby of the State Department building on Monday in recognition of the imminent reopening of the communist nation's embassy in Washington . The Cuban flag will be hung in Washington's lobby .
 President Eisenhower had the Cuban embassy closed in January 1961 . President Eisenhower severed diplomatic relations with the communist government of Fidel Castro .
 President Obama announced in December 2014 that he is setting a ""new course"" with Cuba . President Obama said in December that he was setting a 'new course' with Cuba.
 The Cuban regime shows no sign of slowing down on the number of human-rights activists they arrest . Just days away from the historic reopening of the U.S. embassy in Havana, the regime continues to arrest activists .
 For 13 consecutive Sundays, Cuban authorities have arrested members of the Ladies in White dissident group either before or after traditional mass at the Santa Rita church in Havana .
 Joanne Chesimard killed a New Jersey state trooper named Werner Foerster during a traffic stop . She killed the trooper during a stop in New Jersey .
 Though she received a life sentence, Chesimard fled to Cuba where she has been taking refuge from the American legal system ever since . She received the life sentence but has since taken refuge in Cuba .
 She joined Charlie Hill who, in 1971, killed a state trooper in New Mexico then hijacked a plane to Cuba . Charlie Hill killed a New Mexico state trooper, then hijacked the plane and took it to Cuba.
 The two cop killers join almost seventy other American murderers, bank robbers, and others sought by the FBI who have taken up residence in Cuba to avoid the U.S. legal system .
 Cuba got everything it wanted, but the U.S. did not get back a single felon . The United States didn't get back any felonies . The deal was struck by Barack Obama and Cuba .
 Dominique Strauss-Kahn to advise Cuba on U.S. business relations . Former IMF chief will advise Cuba about United States business relations with the U.K.
 Strauss-Kahn's name and reputation aren't exactly spotless . Despite having criminal charges dropped against him, he settled a civil suit out of court . He was acquitted in France of ""aggravated pimping" charges last month .
 Raúl Castro says he hopes Obama uses executive authority to ease embargo . Castro hopes Obama will use executive power to ease the embargo on Cuba .
 Cuba's Raúl Castro says it's not possible to conceive of normal relations with the U.S. as long as the ""blockade"" of the island remains in place . Castro hopes Obama uses his executive authority to dismantle aspects of the 53-year-old economic embargo .
 From January of this year (less than two weeks after Obama's announcement in December the United States would unilaterally surrender to the Castro regime's demands) to June, Cuba's totalitarian dictatorship has amassed nearly 3,000 violent arrests of dissidents .
 This is the Cuba the propagandists want you to believe exists but it doesn't . Cuba is the country you believe exists, but it is not . This is Cuba . Cuba .
 This month the United States Coast Guard deported 38 Cuban rafters, after they attempted to reach the Florida coast . The U.S. Coast Guard has deported 38 of the rafters .
 9,371 Cubans made it to the U.S. in the first quarter of 2015 . The number of Cubans who made it into the United States is more than 9,000 .
 A shaky United States policy regarding deportation may well be driving the surge . A shaky U.S. policy regarding de-deportation may also be behind the surge, experts say .
 The Cuban tyrant's greeting ought to terrify the Greeks, given his game for the past 50 years . He has a long record of default, deadbeatery and corruption unmatched in the hemisphere on a per capita basis .
 Castro committed as ""a revolutionary"" to destroying the capitalist system . Castro, remember, is a totalitarian communist committed as a revolutionary . Castro is committed to destroying capitalism .
 For all the attention there has been on his long record of human rights violations, his efforts to make economic warfare on the West and destroy the capitalist system is equally notable .
 His own record of attempting to create a ""debtor's cartel"" to rise up against the Western powers, particularly the United States, and collectively default on all the billions owed to its banks .
 I have to wonder how many who work at the NY Times will forgo their own trips to the beach, either down at the Jersey Shore or along Long Island coastline .
 They forget about the deplorable conditions in other Communist countries, such as the Soviet Union and China . Oh, and they forget that they forget about deplorable environmental conditions in those countries .
 They also do not seem too concerned over the environmental degradation caused by ""green"" companies like Solyndra . The government also does not seem to be too concerned about the environmental damage caused by green companies .
 JetBlue is the first major airline to offer a weekly connection from JFK Airport . JFK, the president, restricted travel to Cuba more than 50 years ago .
 Most indicators of human rights on the island have moved in the wrong direction . That's just as well because in the first six months of Mr Obama's normalization of relations with the Communist regime, most indicators of rights have moved wrong .
 President Obama's much hailed ""normalization"" of ties with Cuba is anything but normal . President Obama has been criticized for his "normalization" of Cuba ties .
 For decades the U.S. left has done its best to convince us that Cuba is a benign, progressive paradise that just needs to be unshackled from our tyranny . For decades, the left has tried to convince Americans that Cuba should be a benign paradise .
 The Castros are running a murderous dictatorship 90 miles south of Key West that has exported violence around the world . They are the Castros, who have a history of violence .
 Yesterday he took to the White House to celebrate normalized relations with the most despotic regime in the Western Hemisphere .
 Obama's foreign policy is meant to be his crowning foreign policy accomplishment . It's appropriate, because it's every bit as ill-conceived as everything else Obama has done overseas . Obama has been criticized for his lack of foreign policy expertise .
 President Obama formally announced Wednesday that the U.S. and Cuba have both agreed to open embassies in each other's capitals . The move follows more than a half-century of hostilities between the two nations .
 The U.S. Embassy in Havana is scheduled to open on July 20, the Cuban Foreign Ministry says . The United States Embassy in Cuba is scheduled for the same time as the Cuban capital .
 The United States and Cuba have agreed to restore diplomatic relations on July 20 . John Kerry would become the first U.S. secretary of state to visit Cuba in 70 years . Kerry would be the first Secretary of State to visit the country since 1964 .
 It wouldn't surprise me to learn someday that Mr Kerry has already been there this year, working out the details of this deal . Mr Kerry is already in the process of negotiating the deal .
 Cuba Demands Return Of Guantanamo, End Of United States TV Broadcasts In Return For Diplomacy . Cuba demands return of Guantanamo, end of U.S. TV broadcasts in return for diplomatic favor . Cuba has refused to return Guantanamo Bay prisoners .
 President Obama described the embassy as a move representing the liberation of the American people from ""the past" Cuban government issued a statement refusing to reestablish full diplomatic relations with the U.S. until America gifted the territory of Guantánamo Bay to Cuba .
 Some Republican leaders are sharply criticizing the Obama administration for establishing official diplomatic ties with Cuba . Cuba has been under the control of Communist dictator Fidel Castro and his brother Raul since 1959 .
 A number of GOP presidential candidates and the speaker of the House of Representatives have noted the continued oppression of the Cuban people under the Castros .
 President Obama announced a major step toward ""diplomatic relations with the Republic of Cuba"" by saying the United States and Cuba would reopen embassies in each other's countries .
 U.S. and Cuban government officials will announce on Wednesday that the two countries have reached an agreement to re-establish diplomatic relations . The two countries will open embassies in Washington and Havana, a senior administration official says .
 It's unfortunate that the discussion about U.S.-Cuba relations remains so focused on the embargo . It is unfortunate that it is unfortunate to discuss the embargo on Cuba, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It obscures developments within Cuba and excludes considerations on what should be done to free Cubans to choose their own destiny . The Cuban people should be able to choose what they want to do in Cuba, the Cuban president says .
 Cubans aspire to live in a democracy and with a free-enterprise economy that allows them to improve their lives . Cubans want to live a democracy, with an open economy that gives them opportunities to improve lives .
 So far, the beneficiaries of economic reforms have been the military and their relatives . So far they have been filling cigarette lighters, making paper flowers or working as a barber and such .
 For 17 years, as Castro's chief bodyguard and trusted factotum, [Juan Reinaldo Sÿnchez Crespo] was close to the Cuban throne . For seventeen years, he was the Cuban president's trusted confidante .
 He witnessed and recorded sensitive conversations, was ordered to compile detailed records of Fidel's activities . He coordinated his security and travel, vacationed with him, and accumulated a remarkably textured understanding of the commander in chief .
 Sÿnchez worshipped Fidel, even after being demoralized by the trial and execution of general Arnaldo Ochoa and three others in 1989 . He worshipped Fidel even after his death .
 He says it was only because Castro no longer trusted him after a brother fled Cuba on a raft to Miami . He says Castro's brother fled to Miami on a boat to escape the Castro regime .
 After two years in prison and ten unsuccessful attempts to do the same, Sÿnchez boarded a smugglers' boat and fled . After two unsuccessful attempts, he boarded a smuggler's boat to flee the country .
 United States frees hundreds of Cuban criminals because Havana won't take them back . U.S. frees dozens of criminals from Cuba, but Havana refuses to take them home . Havana says it will not take the criminals back to Cuba .
 Hundreds of Cuban criminals are released onto the streets of the U.S. every year because that nation won't take them back . The Obama administration is trying to broker a more open relationship with Cuba .
 A 2001 Supreme Court ruling said the government cannot detain immigrants indefinitely if their home countries won't take them back . It's a quirk of immigration law known as ""Zadvydas cases,"" after a 2001 ruling .
 Cubans take U.S. journalism classes, risking harassment and even arrest . Cubans risk harassment and arrest if they take journalism classes .
 To their government, however, they are taking part in criminal activity . To the government, they say they're taking part of criminal activity. To them, they're doing what they say .
 President Obama's efforts to normalize relations with the Castro dictatorship in Cuba have obscured questions over what should be done to help Cubans choose their own destiny .
 Cubans aspire to live in a democracy and within an economic system that would permit them, not just those associated with the military or the Castro family, to improve their lives by engaging in economic activities independent from the government . Cuba's economy is independent of the military and Castro family .
 Cuba removed from state sponsors of terrorism list, State Department says . State Department removes Cuba from list of sponsors of terror list . Cuba removed on State Department's request to remove Cuba from terrorism list . The U.S. government says Cuba is no longer a sponsor of terrorism .
 The U.S. State Department removes Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terror . Cuba has had the designation since 1982 . The move is part of a thaw in relations between the Cold War foes .
 Last year's increase compares with rises of 1 percent and 2.4 percent in the two preceding years . Last year, last year's rise was 1 percent .
 The communists celebrated after President Obama announced his decision to remove Cuba from the list of countries that support terrorism . The communist party celebrated the move .
 The lifting of Cuba from the list of nations that support terrorism was a farce that may well come back to haunt the U.S. U.N. President Barack Obama lifted Cuba off the terrorism list, but it may come back .
 President Obama removed Cuba from the State Department's list of State Sponsors of Terrorism, where President Reagan had placed it in 1982 . Quotation marks are now required around the term ""State-Sponsor of Terrorism"" when referring to Cuba .
 U.S. travel to Cuba is booming, despite an official ban on tourist travel . United States travel to the island nation is booming despite a ban on tourism .
 President Obama is looking to travel to Cuba's capitol city of Havana before his tenure ends . A Florida bank announced that the State Department has given them permission to make diplomatic transactions between the two nations .
 20 couples ""symbolically exchanged"" wedding vows, even as same-sex marriage remains illegal in Cuba . Same-sex marriages are still illegal in the country .
 If this can happen under the dictatorial nose of despots Fidel and Raul Castro, then it's already permissible . If this is already permissible, it will be permissible, says CNN.com .
 The truth is that Cuba today is the poorest country in the Americas, poorer than Haiti . Cuba is poorer than any other country, Haiti, says President Obama .
 The small Central American country has the world's highest murder rate . Its per-capita income is less than that of Honduras, the country with the highest in the world .
 Cubans today would be suffering from mass starvation if the country were not receiving upwards of $7 billion per year from their allies in the Venezuelan government . Venezuela's allies in Venezuela are estimated to be at least $6 billion a year .
 Cuba manufactures nothing and produces nothing, except cigars and small quantities of rum . Cuba produces only small amounts of rum and cigars . Cuba is the only country in the world to produce its own own products .
 Cuba's once vaunted sugar industry, the world's largest before the communist takeover, has been completely destroyed . Cuba has become a net importer of sugar . Cuba is now a net-importer of sugar.
 There are not even enough sugar produced in Cuba for its own meager, and rationed, domestic consumption . Cuba is not even even producing enough sugar to produce for domestic use . Cuba's sugar production is rationed and limited .
 For the first time in five decades, the U.S. is allowing ferry service between Florida and Cuba . The ferry service will be the first between Cuba and Florida since 1959 .
 At least four companies said they were notified Tuesday of approvals by the U.S. Treasury and Commerce departments . The approval is the first since Washington imposed a trade embargo on Cuba .
 April saw other forms of political repression increase, especially against dissident group Ladies in White . While the figure is lower than that registered in March, April saw increased repression .
 Líder was caught up in cocaine trafficking to such an extent that he was directing illegal operations like a real godfather . He said: "I realized that the man for whom I had long sacrificed my life, the man ... I worshipped like a god"
 The Comandante, with his talent for dissimulation, went back to work as if nothing was amiss . He went on his way back to the job .
 Drug trafficking was, above all, a weapon of revolutionary struggle more than a means of making money . For him, drug trafficking was more important than making money, he says .
 Florida's Ros-Lehtinen says Republicans won't challenge removing Cuba from terror sponsors list . She says Republicans will not challenge removal of Cuba's list of terror sponsors . The list includes Cuba, Cuba, Russia, Iran, Syria, Sudan, Sudan and Yemen .
 Republican congressional leaders admit defeat in their effort to thwart Obama's plan to remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism . President Barack Obama wants Cuba removed from the state sponsor of terrorism list .
 Ileana Ros-Lehtinen met with a number of her fellow lawmakers last week to strategize way to prevent the de-listing of Cuba in a bill she planned to introduce this week . The lawmaker was told that Congress legally can't prevent the White House from removing Cuba
 The Monday visit, which had been announced in January, will be the first of its kind since U.S. and Cuban authorities last December made public their intention to normalize diplomatic relations between the two nations . The visit is the first since the United States and Cuba made public last December
 The list of participants, announced Sunday by Cuomo, also includes top officials from educational and research institutions and several politicians . Cuomo: The list includes top education and research officials and politicians .
 Hillary's campaign logo and the Left's love affair with Communist Cuba is the subject of a new book . Hillary Clinton's campaign slogan is "Hillary's Cuba" and the left's love for Cuba .
 We'd agree with those who say it looks as though it looks like it was inspired by the Cuban flag . But we'd agree that it was likely inspired by Cuba .
 Obama says Cuba doesn't sponsor terrorism, but it doesn't take a big or surprising leap to make a connection between the two . Obama: Cuba is not sponsoring terrorism. It's not surprising to see a link between terrorism and terrorism .
 Havana is like a Star Wars cantina of Cold War radicals — including some of the FBI's Most Wanted Terrorists . Havana is Havana, Cuba, Cuba's capital, Havana, is home to some of America's most wanted terrorists . Havana has a history of Cuban radicals, including some
 Day after Obama Removes Cuba from Terror Sponsor List, Terror Group Sponsored by Cuba kills 10 . Terror group sponsored by Cuba killed 10 people, including two Americans . Obama removed Cuba from terror sponsor list .
 President Obama removed Cuba from the United States State Sponsors of Terror list . The move is part of his push to normalize relations with the communist dictatorship .
 Just hours later, a terror group long fostered by Cuba murdered 10 Colombian soldiers and wounded 17 others . The Castro brothers are harboring several wanted members of the group even today .
 President Obama recommends that Cuba be a state sponsor of international terrorism . Cuba has been designated as a terrorist sponsor by the U.S. State Department of Cuba .
 The White House issued a statement declaring the administration's ""intention to rescind Cuba's State Sponsor of Terrorism designation" several days after the president returned from the Summit of the Americas in Panama . The president met with heads of state from across the region, including for the first time with Cuban President
 President Barack Obama will remove Cuba from the list of state sponsors of terrorism . The move is a key step in his bid to normalize relations between Cuba and the United States .
 Cuban leader Raúl Castro has no interest in visiting the White House, a report says . He would like to come to Miami, according to a report in Panama, Panama .
 Castro spoke to reporter Glenda Umaña, formerly of CNN en Español, in a hallway at the Summit of the Americas over the weekend .
 There's no reason for Obama to do buddy-buddy sitdowns with Raul Castro except to rub it in the face of his critics . We can trade with them, as we do with other nations, without becoming BFFs . Still, there's no need for President Obama
 Cuban imprisonment and torture of American servicemen was confirmed by surviving airmen who were repatriated in 1973 . Surviving airmen said they were tortured by Cuban soldiers .
 The transport of 17 of these men to Cuba for medical experiments in torture techniques is disturbing . Even more disturbing is the transport of the men to the country for torture techniques .
 Some were held in Havana's Los Maristas — a secret Cuban prison run by Castro's intelligence service . Others were sent to the Mazorra Hospital, where they functioned as human guinea pigs to develop improved methods of torture and drugs .
 President Obama signals he will remove Cuba from the United States list of state sponsors of terrorism . Obama is preparing for a historic encounter with Cuban President Raul Castro . President Obama says Cuba will be removed from the list .
 Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez says U.S. president should use executive action to remove parts of the embargo immediately . Raul Castro and Barack Obama shook hands during famous handshake .
 President Obama officially closes chapter in U.S. history that has guided presidents since nearly beginning . Obama says the United States will no longer act to resist overseas influence in the Hemisphere .
 Obama disparages past efforts by the U.S. to forestall the spread of Communism in Latin America . He suggested similar missions would no longer be undertaken . Obama spoke Friday during a forum in Panama City, Panama .
 President Obama is expected to grant one of Cuban President Raul Castro's top demands and remove his country from the U.S. list of governments that sponsor terrorism . The move is expected during this weekend's Summit of the Americas .
 Robert Menendez warns, not only flies in the face of all evidence, but removes critical leverage in Washington's efforts to bring scores of fugitive U.S. terrorists to justice . Menendez: "The decision to strip the power of the Senate from the Senate of the Judiciary to investigate
 U.S. President Barack Obama met Cuban President Raul Castro on Saturday in the highest-level talks between the two countries in nearly 60 years . The two men agreed to push ahead on improving relations after decades of hostility .
 The remark came at a summit in Panama where leaders from countries in North, Central and South America are meeting to discuss a range of issues . Obama is expected to meet with Cuban President Raul Castro .
 Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa said the embargo against Cuba is illegal . He said Guantanamo Bay should be given back to the island country . Correa also called for the return of Guantanamo Bay .
 President Obama held a historic formal meeting with Cuban President Raul Castro Saturday . The first between U.S. and Cuban leaders in over half a century . Obama pledged to 'turn the page' and develop a new relationship between the countries .
 The two leaders shook hands Friday at the start of the summit . They met Saturday on the sidelines of the a Panama City convention center .
 Heads of state gather this week in Panama for the Summit of the Americas . Expect a celebration, a confrontation, and lots of lies .
 The gathering will be celebrating the restoration of relations between the U.S. and Cuba . The gathering is scheduled to be held in Cuba .
 Barack Obama and Raul Castro shake hands, signaling the start of a new era for the two countries . Obama and Castro will shake hands at the end of their first meeting .
 The dawn of U.S.-Cuba rapprochement has come with a dreary reminder of what we're dealing with . Cuban agents beat up dissidents at a hemispheric summit in Panama, just as they do back home in Havana .
 U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry and Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez have held talks . The meeting is the highest level meeting between the two countries in more than half a century .
 The two held closed-door discussions after arriving in Panama for a summit . The two are meeting for the first time since they arrived in Panama .
 The U.S. state department has reportedly recommended that Cuba be removed from its list of states said to sponsor terrorism . Meanwhile, the United States state department reportedly recommends that Cuba should be removed .
 Such a move could pave the way for the two countries re-opening embassies . The two countries have not yet reopened embassies .
 Raul Castro's tough demands raise doubts, but Obama remains optimistic for U.S.-Cuba relations . Obama: "I'm optimistic for the future of the United States"
 At a town hall in Kingston, Jamaica, Mr Obama praised the ""extraordinary"" Cuban people . He said it's time for the two nations to put the Cold War behind them .
 The State Department has certified Cuba has not provided support to terrorist groups within the last 6 months . Cuba is not providing support to terrorists in the past 6 months, the State Department says .
 Poll Finds Informed United States Voters Dead Against Cuba Normalization . Poll finds informed U.S. voters dead against normalization of Cuba .
 A survey by InterAmerican Security Watch challenges the notion that normalization with Cuba will enjoy popular support . The survey is based on a survey of Americans who support normalization of Cuba .
 ISW acknowledges that right now a slim majority of U.S. citizens agree with President Barack Obama's move to restore diplomatic ties . ISW acknowledged that a small majority of Americans are likely to agree with the move .
 Support evaporates as people learn of Castro regime's foreign-policy record and human-rights violations, study says . Support evaporated as those who learn of the regime's record, study finds .
 President Barack Obama arrives in Kingston, Jamaica, on the first leg of his trip to the Caribbean . He will meet with 48 leaders of Caribbean nations in the capital city . Obama will then head to the Summit of the Americas in Panama to meet with leaders of the Caribbean nations .
 The presence of Cuba at the 7th Summit of the Americas will allow progress to be made on other key matters for the hemisphere, Sen. Ruben Navarrette says .
 Tim Kaine is one of the U.S. legislators most involved in Latin America . Kaine is a member of the United States . Kaine says Latin America is a key part of his Latin American policy .
 Cuba has never attended the hemispheric gathering, which has been held since 1994 . The summit is being hosted by Panama, which will be held in Panama this weekend .
 Cuban President Raul Castro's expected appearance at a regional summit for the Organization of American States has alarmed critics of his regime . Critics say the autocratic leader's presence will undermine the group's professed support for democratic values .
 Castro is slated to make his first appearance at the OAS' Summit of the Americas on Friday and Saturday in Panama . Castro is scheduled to attend the summit in Panama for the first time .
 The Inter-American Democratic Charter states that members can be suspended if they take actions that undermine democracy . The charter was adopted in September 2001, and was adopted by September 2001 .
 Obama says he will act fast to take Cuba off the list of terrorism-sponsoring countries . State Department recommendation will come from State Department, Obama says . Cuba is currently listed as a terrorist sponsor by the U.S. government .
 Cuba has made it clear that it will not move on certain negotiations until it is removed from the list . Cuba says it is not willing to negotiate with the U.S. government until it has been removed .
 A poll of Cuban-Americans shows support for the White House's new Cuba policy has risen . 51 percent now in favor of closer engagement with Cuba, up from 44 percent in December, poll shows .
 The United States and Cuba are set to mark an historic milestone next week . President Obama and Cuban President Raul Castro will share the stage at the upcoming Summit of the Americas in Panama .
 It will be the first scheduled meeting between leaders of the two countries in nearly 60 years . The meeting is scheduled for the first time in six decades .
 Obama imposes sanctions on Venezuelan officials accused of violating the human rights of political opponents . The sanctions come as his administration seeks closer ties with Cuba, Venezuela's staunchest ally .
 Obama's executive order places sanctions on seven Venezuelan government and military officials . The administration says they have undermined democracy in the country, overseen the abuse of anti-government protesters, curtailed freedom of expression .
 Celebrities from B-List celebrities go to Havana, Cuba, to celebrate . Tourism remains illegal for Americans to visit Cuba .
 Hilton and Naomi Campbell posed for selfies with Fidel Castro's son, Fidel Castro Diaz-Balart . Hilton and Campbell posed with Fidel's son and model Naomi Campbell .
 Arnaldo Alfonso has taken pride in seeing his ""habanos"" sampled by visiting heads of state and other dignitaries . Over six decades rolling premium cigars with his small, wrinkled hands .
 U.S. Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi meets with Cuban deputies in first dialogue since diplomatic relations were restored . Pelosi is heading an official delegation of Democratic representatives visiting Havana .
 Che Guevara's daughter Aleida is in Canada this week whooping up president Obama's opening to the Stalinist regime her father co-founded . Aleida says he'd certainly approve of the president's move .
 Aside from her father, few people knew from first-hand experience how easily U.S. officials can be snookered .
 House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi is leading a delegation to Cuba on Tuesday while Congress is out on recess . Pelosi is the leader of a congressional delegation to the island nation .
 It is the first official House delegation trip to Cuba since President Obama announced lifting certain restrictions on Cuba in December . The trip is scheduled to take place in Cuba .
 The United States and Cuba will hold a second round of talks in Washington nest week aimed at restoring diplomatic relations . Democratic senators visiting Havana say there may be enough support among Republicans to lift a trade embargo on Cuba .
 A strain of HIV that could develop into AIDS before patients realize they are infected has been identified in Cuba . The strain could be a strain that could lead to AIDS before people realize they're infected, experts say .
 The aggressive variant was seen in patients who developed AIDS within three years of contacting the virus, according to a new study . The study was published in the journal AIDS Studies .
 A new HIV strain in some patients in Cuba appears to be much more aggressive and can develop into AIDS within three years of infection . A new strain can develop as early as three years after being infected .
 Researchers said the progression happens so fast that treatment with antiretroviral drugs may come too late . Researchers said treatment for HIV-positive patients could be too late for treatment .
 President Obama announced plans to normalize relations with Cuba this week . Sen. Ted Cruz, a Democrat in Florida, said he was disappointed by the announcement .
 As soon as Obama made his announcement, it became clear he'd pretty much given up the store and gotten nothing in return . Obama made the announcement, but it was clear he had already given up .
 Cuba didn't have to make any concessions on freedom of speech, democratic elections, a market economy, a free market economy . Cuba had to make no concessions on the rights of speech or democratic elections . Cuba's president has been accused of corruption in Cuba .
 It didn't have to turn over U.S. fugitives, including a convicted cop killer, whom it's been protecting for years . It's not the first time the government has turned over fugitives .
 The move sparked a heated debate over the motivation behind Obama's new Cuban détente . Republicans and Democrats on Capitol Hill declared Cuban President Raul Castro's latest demands to return the U.S. base at Guantanamo Bay back to Cuba dead on arrival .
 Ted Cruz is an outspoken Cuban-American opponent of normalizing relations with Cuba . Cruz: Castro's new insistence that America hand over Gitmo and lift the trade embargo is no surprise .
 Sen. Marco Rubio and Robert Menendez have vehemently opposed the Obama administration's rapprochement and concessions toward Cuba . Some Republicans have banded together to let President Obama know that they have an eye on lifting the decades-old embargo .
 Cuban President Raul Castro demands U.S. return the United States base at Guantanamo Bay, lift the half-century trade embargo on Cuba and compensate his country for damages before the two nations re-establish normal relations .
 Retired Cuban leader Fidel Castro appeared to lend his support to talks with the U.S. in his first comments about his longtime adversary . Both countries agreed last month to restore diplomatic ties with each other .
 Castro, 88, stopped short of an enthusiastic endorsement of the rapprochement, announced on December 17 by his brother and current president, Raul Castro, and President Obama . Castro, who has been in Cuba for more than 30 years, has been critical of the Cuba-U
 Cuba forfeited sovereign immunity in the U.S. when it embraced terrorist groups in Latin America three decades ago . The United States says it forfeited the immunity that protects it from civil suits in the United States courts . Cuba is accused of using its sovereign immunity to fight terrorism in Latin
 Holder to explain policy for fugitives in Cuba, including a convicted cop killer . Holder was speaking Friday to explain the administration's policy . President Obama's announced normalization of relations with Cuba .
 The Vatican's secretary of state emphasized Francis' ambitions for making the Holy See a bigger player in international diplomacy . After the United States agreed to restore relations with Cuba, a deal that included the involvement of the pontiff himself, the Vatican says .
 Former deputy national security adviser Tony Blinken says he regrets not consulting lawmakers more during negotiations to normalize relations with Cuba . Blinken tells a congressional panel he "regrets" not consulting with lawmakers more .
 Blinken said White House would consult Congress when changing Cuba policy . Rubio pressed Blinken on comments he made in November . Blinken is now the deputy secretary of State .
 Cuban refugees have been surging toward Florida since President Obama's mid-December executive action on relations with Havana . Neither U.S. nor Cuba has made significant changes to policies governing immigrants fleeing the communist dictatorship .
 U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Western Hemisphere Affairs Roberta Jacobson will travel to Cuba Wednesday to open discussions between the two countries . Jacobson is scheduled to meet with Cuba's ambassador to Havana .
 The trip would likely be the first by a major U.S. public official to the communist nation . The Obama administration began to relax embargo restrictions around the country .
 Ronaldo Reyes Rabanal and Luís Enrique Labrador were arrested while attending a meeting of the opposition group, Movement for a New Republic . According to independent media sources, the men were arrested .
 Lazara María Borrego Guzmán, a member of the Ladies in White opposition movement, was also allegedly arrested during the meeting . Cuban officials allegedly broke her arm during the alleged arrest .
 Bianco and Diango Vargas Martin were turned out of a Cuban prison last week . The 19-year-old twin brothers were released from a prison in Cuba .
 Raul Castro's government released 53 dissidents as part of an agreement with the Obama administration for ""normalized"" relations between Washington and Havana . They are two of 53 dissidents released by the government of Cuba .
 Venezuela struggles to keep sugar-daddy Venezuela's sugar flowing . 100,000 essentially free barrels daily to Cuba . Obama comes to the rescue .
 The Obama administration announced sweeping measures Thursday that will ease sanctions against Cuba . The measures will open up the Communist-ruled country to expanded travel and trade by Americans .
 The 54-year-old U.S. embargo on Cuba will remain in place . The rules from the Commerce and Treasury departments that go into effect Friday will allow more trade in agriculture and telecommunications .
 Tourism by Americans still is officially prohibited . The new regulations also will enable more U.S. residents to travel to the island without obtaining a license .
 Cuban prisoner release overshadowed by rumour of Fidel Castro's death . Rumour of his death overshadowed by a rumour that he died .
 38 political dissidents have been released from prison in Syria . Human rights activists welcomed the release of 38 dissidents . Amnesty International: 38 dissidents were released .
 Any euphoria is tempered by concerns that they could be rounded up again at any moment, especially if they resumed anti-government protests . Any euphorism is tempered, however, by concerns over the possibility of them being rounded up .
 Most were incarcerated for minor offences while higher-profile detainees remained behind bars . It also appeared that most had been incarcerated for . minor offences .
 Cuban dissidents, their relatives and supporters say the island's government has freed at least 38 people on a U.S. list of imprisoned opposition members . Cuban dissidents say the government freed 38 people from a United States list of prisoners .
 United States denies Cuba resisting release of several prisoners on list . U.S. says Cuba has been trying to negotiate with Cuba to release prisoners . Cuba denies it is trying to get Cuba's release of prisoners on its list .
 White House official denies Cuban government is resisting freeing some of the 53 people listed for release . U.S.-Cuba relations are on the verge of a thaw after years of tension between the two countries .
 White House Unsure If Cuba Has Released 53 Political Prisoners as Promised . Cuba has promised to release 53 political prisoners as promised . White House unsure if Cuba has actually released political prisoners .
 President Obama announced his plans to ""normalize"" relations between the U.S. and Cuba just before Christmas . He did so with few pre-conditions . President Obama has said that relations will normalize with Cuba .
 The Castro regime was forced to release 53 political prisoners in Cuba in order to normalize relations with the U.S. However, one of the conditions of normalizing relations with Cuba was for the Castro regime to release the prisoners .
 When asked about their release yesterday, White House press secretary Josh Earnest could not say for certain if it had occurred . Earnest said the Cuban government would be working on their own timeline .
 State Department Spokeswoman Jen Psaki gave a similar answer during her daily briefing yesterday . The State Department has not commented on the matter .
 President Obama's drive to normalize ties with communist Cuba is raising new concerns among security officials and experts . Security officials are concerned that the administration will give up the strategic naval base at Guantanamo Bay .
 The Obama administration does not plan to negotiate the return of the base, officials say . The base has been leased by the U.S. since 1903 . It is leased to the United States from 1903 .
 State Dept. can't say if Cuba has released 53 political prisoners it promised to release . State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki couldn't say whether Cuba has freed political prisoners . Cuba has promised to free political prisoners when it struck a deal to normalize relations .
 Cuban government hasn't exactly been a model for transparency the last half century . The Cuban government has been accused of corruption in the past .
 Obama announced two weeks ago that the United States government had released three Cuban spies . Included in his deal with Cuba, Obama announced that the U.S. government had freed three spies .
 The lack of progress in freeing the Cuban political prisoners increases the scrutiny on that White House decision . White House has been criticized for not freeing political prisoners .
 The scion of the man who was responsible for the Cuban blockade is full of awe for the dictatorship . He is the son of a former Cuban dictator who is now the son-of-one .
 Sure it's a dictatorship, but other than that, it's just ducky, apparently . "It's just a dictatorship," says President Obama .
 Any deal between the U.S. and Cuba ought to aim at maximizing economic freedom . It should aim to hand the communist regime only the political benefits that are inevitable . And it should also facilitate the growth of the still embryonic civil society on the island .
 President Barack Obama's ""normalization"" of relations with Cuba will have only a tiny economic impact on the people . Unfortunately, it will bring the Castro dictatorship political and financial benefits .
 ""Solidarity movements and committees"" have been active on American soil for many years . These ""solidarity movements" were active in the United States .
 I covered one of their conferences last year at a Baptist church just a few blocks from the White House . I covered a conference last year in a Baptist .
 It is time for hearings into the role of these activities in the change in Obama's Cuba policy . The hearings should be held in the wake of the changes in the policy .
 If Cuba is given a full-fledged embassy in Washington, we can anticipate more spying and subversion on U.S. soil . The Cuban government has been accused of spying on American soil .
 Most of you quickly figured out how Obama's new amnesty plan creates more Democratic voters . Obama's amnesty plan is aimed at drawing Democrats to the polls .
 President Obama's executive orders have been in place since he first took office . He looped around it with executive orders, a process that started when he took office, he said .
 The Helms-Burton Act of 1996 codified some of the vital economic sanctions against Cuba into U.S. law . A full and genuine ""lifting of the embargo"" requires a Congressional vote .
 Roberto Pizano was marched from inside a prison to a pond holding human waste from a tuberculosis hospital nearby . He was marched to the pond for four months before being taken to a nearby tuberculosis hospital where he was beaten .
 As punishment for his crimes against the revolution of Fidel Castro, Pizano was held face down until he nearly drowned . As punishment, he was held in a pool of water until he almost drowned .
 He would spend 18 years in Cuban prisons . For him, it was an introduction to the 18 years he would spend in Cuban prison .
 Cuba has had normal relations with the rest of the world for decades . Except for the United States, Cuba has been normalized with the world .
 Tourists, trade, investment from Canada, France, Britain, Spain, everywhere . Tourists and trade from Canada and France .
 An avalanche of nylons — and not an inch of movement in Cuba toward freedom — has not moved an inch toward freedom . Cuba is still in the throes of a state of mourning .
 In fact, one could argue that this influx of Western money has helped preserve the dictatorship . Just about all financial transactions go through the government, which takes for itself before any trickle-down crumbs are allowed to reach the regime-indentured masses .
 Despite the thaw in relations between the U.S. and Cuba, the base remains a sore point for Cubans . The Castros, first Fidel and now his brother Raúl, have long pointed to as a stinging symbol of American imperialism .
 Last month, Cuba announced it would re-establish full diplomatic relations with the U.S. State Department . The two countries have been at odds for years over the return of the base .
 Gross works for a subcontractor of the U.S. Agency for International Development . Gross: "I don't think it's a good thing for the world," Gross says .
 He went to Cuba to distribute cellphones and laptops to civil-society groups and to individuals . He distributed cell phones and laptops .
 Obama's wide-ranging order wipes out the restriction that limited Cuban Americans to one trip every three years to the island . The order also wipes out restrictions that limited Cubans to one visit every 3 years to island .
 Cuban Americans can send unlimited amounts of money to relatives in Cuba . Also under the new policy, Cuban Americans are allowed to send unlimited amount of money .
 The Obama administration is pushing to protect Antarctica's fragile environment by imposing mandatory limits on the size of cruise ships and the number of passengers they bring ashore .
 Obama administration stung by Cuban crackdown on dissidents, complicating detente . Obama administration: Cuba's crackdown complicates detente with U.S. Cuba .
 The Obama administration has responded harshly to the Cuban government's arrest this week of political dissidents planning a protest in downtown Havana . The arrest casts an uncomfortable shadow over the historic detente announced just weeks before between the United States and the Castro regime .
 President Obama claimed his move to normalize relations with Cuba was a means of nudging the military dictatorship toward democracy . President Obama said it was a way to nudge the military dictator toward democracy in Cuba .
 The U.S. State Department blasted the Cuban government for reportedly arresting at least six dissidents . Two weeks after the United States and Cuba agreed to thaw decades of icy relations, the government arrested at least 6 dissidents . The Cuban government is accused of detaining dissidents .
 There was no comment from Cuban authorities on the arrests that were reported by other dissidents and the U.S. State Department . The Cuban government has not commented on the reports .
 If only there were some handy location which happened to be chock-a-block with docs that would jump, say, a 90 mile stretch of water just to see some patients .
 Barack Obama has made a geopolitical irrelevance suddenly relevant to American presidential politics . Barack Obama made the issue relevant to U.S. presidential politics in 2008 .
 Some conservative criticisms of Obama's new Cuba policy seem reflexive . Obama's Cuba policy includes normalizing diplomatic and commercial relations with the U.S.
 They look symptomatic of Cold War nostalgia and 1930s envy . Yearnings for the moral clarity of the struggle with the totalitarians, they say .
 Cuba's regime, although totalitarian, no longer matters in international politics . Cuba's totalitarian regime, however totalitarian, still matters in world politics . Cuban regime's totalitarianism is no longer relevant to international politics, says CNN's John Defterios .
 As bankrupt morally as economically as it is economically, the regime is intellectually preposterous . It's an enticing model only for people who want to live where there are lots of 1950s Chevrolets .
 Official: U.S. Agency for International Development has made a $3.2 million payment to Alan Gross . Official: A United States official said the payment was made to Gross . Gross was the subject of an investigation by the U.N. agency for international development .
 Gross has a separate arrangement to work out payment with his former employer Development Alternatives Inc. to settle legal costs related to his imprisonment . Gross has also been working out payment to his ex-employee to settle costs of his imprisonment and imprisonment .
 He was arrested and imprisoned by the Cuban government . He was working as a USAID subcontractor hired by DAI when he was arrested by the government .
 Vidal's comments in a Monday interview were the clearest sign yet that Cuba has no intention of extraditing America's most-wanted woman, Joanne Chesimard, following a historic detente announced last week by President Barack Obama and Raul Castro of Cuba .
 United States Senate Republican leader McConnell opposes Obama on Cuba . U.S. Senate Republicans oppose Obama on the island nation .
 Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell says he opposes Obama's move to normalize relations with Cuba . McConnell spoke of steps lawmakers could take to try to rein in the new policy .
 Paleo-lib columnist Eleanor Clift was in fine fiddle on The McLaughlin Group yesterday . Clift did not disappoint when the conversation turned to Cuba .
 Ambassador Chris Stevens died of smoke inhalation from fire set ablaze during the attack in Benghazi, Libya . Ambassador Stevens was killed in the September 2012 attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi . Clift: Ambassador Stevens wasn't killed because he died in the attack .
 A less charitable description might use the words ""deceit"", ""amateurism"" and ""bad faith" to characterize the White House .
 Hillary Clinton was the main architect of the deal reached with Cuba . Her advocacy toward opening a new relationship with the Castro regime began almost immediately when she became secretary of state .
 Barack Obama has long believed U.S. Cuba policy should change . Obama has said he did so when he first ran for president in 2008 . President Obama has been critical of Cuba policy since then .
 Obama stressed that the U.S. should hold Cuba to a number of stringent conditions before normalizing relations with Cuba . Obama said Cuba should be held to stringent conditions .
 The first of those conditions was freedom for Cuba's political prisoners . Cuba's first president has been elected to the White House .
 White House Allowed Cuban Spy Convicted of Murder Conspiracy to Artificially Inseminate Wife . White House allowed Cuban Spy convicted of murder conspiracy to have his wife .
 President Obama announced last week that the White House would reestablish diplomatic relations with Cuba . President Obama has demanded of the communist nation no concessions from Cuba .
 President Obama freed the three remaining members of the murderous 'Cuban Five' spy ring . Opponents have objected that this negotiation would benefit the Castro regime at the expense of the Cuban people .
 President Obama announced that the United States and Cuba are on a path to normalizing relations . The move will pave the way for a U.S. Embassy in Havana, and may eventually lead to lifting a 50-year-old American trade embargo .
 Some Americans are already roaming the streets of Old Havana, attending dance exhibitions and talks on architecture . The United States and Cuba begin to normalize relations for the first time in half a century .
 Gov. Christie tells Obama to demand return of cop killer Chesimard to start Cuba talks . Gov. Chris Christie calls for return of police officer who shot dead him in 2009 .
 Chris Christie is urging President Obama to demand that Cuba return convicted police-killer Joanne Chesimard before he proceeds with efforts to improve diplomatic relations with that country . Christie: Obama should demand that the convicted killer be returned to Cuba before diplomatic relations begin .
 Chesimard was found guilty of killing New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster in 1973 . He escaped from prison and fled to Cuba after being convicted of killing him . He was convicted of murder in 1973 before escaping and fleeing to Cuba .
 The 67-year-old has since been provided safe haven by the Cuban government . Chesimard has since died in Cuba .
 Cuba's Coast Guard sank boat carrying 32 Cubans trying to reach Florida coast, woman says . Woman who survived says her husband is missing . She says boat was carrying 32 people who were trying to make it to Florida .
 Masiel González Castellano says her husband, Leosbel Díaz Beoto, is missing after falling from the boat . The boat was repeatedly charged and hit by a boat manned by the Cuban Coast Guard, she says .
 Cuba's Coast Guard sinks boat carrying 32 refugees who were trying to reach Florida . Coast Guard says boat was trying to make it to Florida . Boat was carrying 32 people who had tried to reach the state .
 President Obama should stop insulting the intelligence of Cuba-watchers by claiming to speak and act on their behalf . Obama should also stop insulting them by saying he speaks and acts for them .
 President Barack Obama declared a ""new day"" in U.S.-Cuba relations . After fifty-some years of relative isolationism towards Cuba, the policy came to an end in Obama's first term .
 The President's core message is that after fifty years, our policies towards Cuba have not worked. After fifty years of our policies, we need to change our approach to Cuba, he said .
 Cubans celebrate President Obama, Raul Castro's decision to normalize relations with the U.S. President Barack Obama has normalized relations with Cuba .
 Cubans sing the praises of President Obama and Raul Castro's decision to reestablish diplomatic ties . They say it would lead to a better life for all . Cubans sang the praises Friday of the decision .
 Raul Castro is a brutal dictator who locks up dissenters in gulag-like jails, snuffs out political discourse and condemns his people to socialist poverty . To many exiles and their allies, exiles say he is a dictator who locked up dissidents in jails .
 Some say the definition of insanity is continuing to do the same thing and expect different results . Some say insanity is not being able to change things in the same way .
 Some are applauding President Obama's unilateral change in policy towards Cuba . President Obama has opened up diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 Extradition of Cop Killer from Cuba may not be in 'Best Interest of Americans' of Americans, says U.S. Rep. Carlos Vargas . Vargas says it's not in the best interest of Americans to be in Cuba .
 Joanne Chesimard was serving a life sentence for the execution-style murder of New Jersey State Trooper Werner Foerster in 1973 . She was sentenced to life in prison in 1973 for the murder of a New Jersey trooper .
 She escaped from prison in 1979 and sufficed in Cuba in 1984 . She is believed to still be living in Cuba, where she is thought to be living .
 A reward of up to $1 million is offered for information leading to her capture . A reward is also being offered for her safe return .
 New Jersey State Police say they are working with the FBI to capture Chesimard . The FBI and State Police are working together to capture the man .
 President Barack Obama unveiled a new U.S. policy toward Cuba on Wednesday . Alan Gross was brought home in exchange for three convicted Cuban spies .
 Obama tried to channel the perspective of America's enemies and critics, as if his job were to act as a neutral mediator instead of defending U.S. interests and values . As he has done so often in the past, Obama has channeled the views of the world's enemies
 President Barack Obama announced Wednesday that the United States would be changing its policy toward Cuba . Obama announced that the U.S. would open a Havana embassy and expand travel to Cuba .
 President Obama negotiated the deal between the U.S. and Cuba over the course of 18 months . The president negotiated the agreement between the United States and Cuba . The deal was reached over 18 months in Cuba .
 A United States visit by Cuban President Raul Castro is a possibility, the White House says . Obama and Castro announced a historic bilateral rapprochement a day after he and U.S. President Barack Obama announced a bilateral deal .
 Obama administration moves to normalize relations with abnormal regime 90 miles south of Florida Keys . Obama administration also normalizes relations with the abnormal regime .
 President Obama traded three Cubans jailed in America for one jailed American in Cuba . The president traded three Cuban prisoners in Cuba for one American in the United States .
 11 million people remain imprisoned on the island penitentiary . 11 million remain imprisoned in the island prison .
 The policy of isolating a brutal regime diplomatically and imposing a trade embargo on it is a lot more like a screen than a wall . I'm trying to figure out what exactly the supposed flaw has been in the policy, he says .
 A guest at a White House Hanukkah reception handed President Obama a Cuban cigar . President Obama got a whiff of Havana when a guest at the White House handed him a cigar .
 Obama seemed amused by the still-embargoed tobacco, which was given to him by a Colorado man at the Wednesday party . Obama only hours earlier paved the way for normalizing relations with Cuba .
 If there was a theme to 2014, it was Obama's persistence in bailing out dictators and theocrats from political scrapes and economic hardships . Obama's tenacity in pursuit of engagement with America's adversaries no matter the cost to our strength, principles, credibility or alliances .
 The thugs in Havana and Caracas, Damascus and Tehran, Tehran, Moscow and Naypyidaw and Beijing have no better friend. In this president the thugs in Cuba and Venezuela have no friend. The thugs are no better friends than Obama.
 Barack Obama is more than a dupe, Obama's critics say . For these bullies, these evildoers, these millenarians and sectarians, he says . Obama is not a 'dupe' but a "dupe," he adds .
 Alan Gross, along with an American spy, was killed in exchange for three members of a Cuban espionage ring . Alan Gross was killed along with a spy in Cuba . Gross and three other Cuban spies were exchanged for three other members of the ring .
 Isolating Cuba during the last 30 years of the Cold War helped bankrupt and bring down the Soviet Empire . The Soviet Empire had to carry Cuba on its back . Cuba's isolation helped bankrupt the Soviet empire .
 President Obama's announcement that he is reestablishing diplomatic relations with Cuba is not a cause for celebration, and it's not a success for the president . The president's announcement to reestablish diplomatic ties with Cuba was not a good day for Obama .
 The United States can do a lot more for Cuba than Cuba can do for the U.S. President Obama has said Cuba can help the United States . Obama administration has been criticized for its policies toward the island nation .
 The Castro brothers' control of the country has ensured that Cuba has been a malignant actor in the region and elsewhere for decades, and that is not changing . Cuba has not changed since the Castro brothers took over Cuba in the 1960s .
 The backlash against a deal for the U.S. to reopen its embassy in Havana and thaw its relations with Cuba is underway in Florida . Republicans are threatening to use their control of the Senate to sabotage the plans .
 President's political opponents are unable to stop him from formally restoring U.S. ties with its communist neighbour . They can throw up practical hurdles to slow down or even derail the détente .
 The Obama administration's normalization of relations with Cuba has handed the Communist government an economic lifeline, critics say . Critics say it comes at the same time as its traditional foreign patrons are suffering from their own domestic troubles .
 President Obama announced Wednesday that the United States would loosen travel and commercial restrictions on Cuba . The move is part of its efforts to reestablish diplomatic relations with Cuba .
 The measures could provide some initial relief to the country's largely state-controlled economy . Unemployment thought to be twice as high as the official rate of 4.3 percent in 2013 .
 Obama: "50 years have shown that isolation has not worked"" in displacing the regime of Fidel Castro and his brother and current president, Raul .
 Obama becomes first President since JFK to savor a Cuban cigar after historic deal . Obama was first President to use Cuban cigar in Cuba since JFK . Cuban cigars have been banned in Cuba for decades .
 Barack Obama's historic peace-deal with Cuba after 50 years of cold war hostility was a breakthrough not to be sniffed at . Obama's deal with Cuba was a historic peace deal with the island nation .
 The United States president got close and personal to a Cuban on Wednesday . Not a citizen, but a cigar . The cigar was a cigar, not a Cuban citizen .
 Kennedy stockpiled a stash of his favourite Havanas in the hours before he imposed a trade embargo on the Communist state in 1962 . The secret stash was stockpiled hours before the embargo was imposed .
 If Obama Goes to Cuba For Golf, He Should Bring Back Cop Killer Joanne Chesimard . Obama should bring back cop killer Joanne Cevallard to Cuba .
 It is rumored President Obama could be taking a trip to Cuba next year to golf . President Obama is rumored to be on a golf trip to the island nation .
 Fox News' Greg Gutfeld wants Obama to bring back cop killer Joanne Chesimard, also known as Assata Shakur, upon his return to the U.S. If the president ends up going, Gutfeld says .
 President Obama announced sweeping changes that would allow potential U.S. investment in Cuba . Cuban government apparently had begun preparing itself by announcing new measures . Cuba would allow Cubans who work for foreign companies to keep 8% of their salaries .
 Let's Talk About Obama's Imaginary 'Winning Streak' s you've no doubt have heard, Obama has been on a roll since the midterms .
 There is a rather narrow sample size for that kind of declaration . To be fair, there is a lot of evidence that this is true .
 The Cuba issue, while a good talker, probably isn't the kind of issue that most Americans are exceedingly concerned about . It's not the kind issue most Americans should be concerned about about .
 There are other wins that exist only in the imagination . As we see how that shakes out, there are some other wins only in imagination .
 President Obama continues to embrace low-tier, go-it-alone executive actions to pad the last two years of his mistake-filled, empty-agenda presidency in a hopeless hunt for a legacy .
 President Obama's decision to re-establish diplomatic relations with communist Cuba is the latest example of a president desperately searching for something to do without having to deal with Congress .
 Versailles Restaurant in Miami's Little Havana hosted hard-line Cuban exiles railing against President Obama's decision to establish full diplomatic ties with the Cuban government . The restaurant was hosted by hard-liners railing against the decision .
 They waved placards and hurled insults bilingually, putting on the show they've been rehearsing and staging for half a century . The show was put on the stage for the first time in more than 50 years .
 The pontiff began Wednesday with prayers and a birthday celebration with tango dancers near St. Paul's Cathedral .
 Argentine pope played a key role as broker between Cuba and the United States . His day ended with a historic diplomatic breakthrough between the U.S. and Cuba .
 Barack Obama apologized to Cuban president Raul Castro during their phone conversation after the American commander in chief's opening remarks . Obama apologized for the incident during a phone call with Castro .
 Obama gave more details about his phone call with the communist leader of Cuba earlier this week . Obama spoke to reporters at his final White House press briefing of 2014 .
 This issue is in his wheelhouse, not only as a conservative Cuban-American pol from Florida but as a guy who's looking to distinguish himself as the cream of the hawkish crop in 2016 if he runs for president .
 Ted Cruz might feel obliged, just to make sure there's no one in the field next year that's to his right on any issue that the base is paying attention to . Ted Cruz may feel obliged to do so .
 The answer is nothing, unless you are one of those who believes that the Castro regime is about to reform the economy, allow an independent media, and hold multi-party elections . The answer to the question is nothing .
 Let us take the moment of President Obama's betrayal of Free Cuba to step back a bit — back to say, May 19, 1895 . Let us step back to the May 19th, 1895, when Cuba was still free .
 The tribune of Cuba Libre, Jose Marti, was killed in combat against the Spanish Royalists at the Battle of Dos Rios . That's when the Cuban revolutionary was killed .
 Castro Brothers Join Line of Anti-American Tyrants to Receive Obama's Largess . Castro Brothers join line of anti-American tyrants to receive Obama's large handouts . Castro brothers join Obama's line of enemies .
 You knew that, with all of the national elections that will take place during his presidency behind him, Barack Obama would do everything in his power — broadly defined — to assist the Castro regime .
 President Obama was a good friend to Mohammad Morsi, the Muslim Brotherhood's man in Egypt . Morsi was Morsi's successor to President Barack Obama . Morsi is now the president of Egypt .
 He has made nice with the mullahs in Iran, bailing their country out of serious economic woes under the pretense of slowing Iran's nuclear weapons program . He has bailed Iran out of economic woes by bailing them out of Iran's economic woes . The deal is supposed to
 Putin would have done more to help the autocrat, as he promised to do after he gained ""flexibility"" following the 2012 election, had Putin not set out to dismember Ukraine . He ""reset"" relations with Russia on terms highly favorable to Putin, writes Peter Bergen .
 Beyonce and Jay-Z were humiliated two years ago after they visited Cuba . Beyonce said it's not "cool" to visit countries like Cuba run by totalitarian regimes that sponsor terrorism .
 Cuba is one of the world's nastiest and most brutal totalitarian governments . It's not "cool" to travel to places like Cuba, financially support the regime's tourism industry .
 Obama stresses freedom of Gross from Cuba at Hanukka candlelighting ceremony . President stresses freedom from Cuba . Obama stresses free of Gross .
 U.S. President Barack Obama spoke at White House Hanukka ceremony on Wednesday . President Obama said the 8-day Jewish holiday is tied to historic Cuba policy changes he announced earlier in the day . The changes led to the release of Jewish-American Alan Gross .
 Intel concerns about Russia-Cuba ties preceded Obama's deal to dismantle sanctions . President Obama and President Barack Obama have reached a deal to end sanctions .
 Russia concluded a security deal with Havana aimed at bolstering intelligence and military ties to Cuba . Months before President Obama announced he is seeking to do away with decades of U.S. economic sanctions against the communist regime in Cuba .
 The Russia-Cuba agreement was announced May 16 when a memorandum was signed in Moscow establishing a joint working group between Russia's Security Council and the Cuban Commission for National Security and Defense .
 A cabal of left-wing extremists helped make Gross's release happen . Gross was released from prison after a decade in prison .
 President Obama made clear that this change has been on his bucket list for some time . He also said that his knowledge of Cuba comes straight out of the international Left's playbook .
 Candidate Barack Obama said that, as president, he would talk to anti-American dictators without precondition . Candidate Obama said in 2012 that he would speak to dictators without pre-conditions .
 He didn't mention that he would also give them historic policy concessions without precondition . The president didn't say that he wouldn't give them any concessions .
 President Obama's unilateral change in the U.S. posture toward the Castro dictatorship came without even pretense of serious promises by the Cubans to reform their kleptocratic, totalitarian rule . His surprise unilateral change comes without even the pretense .
 Obama announced that a prisoner swap with the Cuban government for two Americans was the start of a new relationship with the communist country . Republicans began kicking around ideas to stop any changes to the U.S.-Cuba relationship .
 From 2009 to early 2013, Clinton and her top aides took the lead on the sometimes public, often private interactions with the Cuban government . From 2009 until her departure from Cuba, Clinton led the way with the government .
 Clinton was top advocate for ending travel and trade restrictions on Cuba, reversing 50 years of U.S. policy to isolate the Communist island nation . Clinton was also the top advocate inside the government for ending restrictions . Cuba policy experts were involved in the discussions .
 She pressed the White House to move faster and faced opposition from cautious high-ranking White House officials . Repeatedly, she pressed the administration to act faster .
 America's Cuban-American senators threaten to block Obama's Cuba shift . Cuba is a key ally of the U.S. in the world's largest island nation .
 Cuban-Americans serving in the U.S. Senate unleashed a stormy tempest on the White House . Obama's move to open relations with Cuba brought an official weather forecast from Havana's state news agency .
 The president made his shocking announcement armed with a new budget that seems to cement the State Department's ability to fund an embassy and pay salaries in Havana . The State Department announced the embassy will be located in Havana, Cuba .
 Two Republicans threatened action when the new GOP-led Congress convenes . But they were led by a Democrat who has backed the White House on nearly everything for the last six years .
 President Obama has welcomed leaders from countries with questionable human rights records such as China and Burma . Earnest pointed out that President Obama had welcomed leaders such as those of China and Myanmar .
 Alan Gross, a U.S. contractor imprisoned in Cuba for more than five years, is released . The release of Alan Gross "set a price on the head of every American abroad," Sen. Sen. Marco Rubio says . Sen. Rubio: The release sets a "price on
 Rubio: "It is a brutal dictatorship" Rubio is a Cuban-American . Rubio says the Cuban government is "brutally brutal"
 Former President Jimmy Carter praised President Barack Obama's "political courage" in reestablishing relations with Cuba . Carter praised Obama's decision to reestablish relations between Cuba and Cuba .
 Rangel, who was in Havana for some reason, said the Cuban people were ecstatic . Rangel: "Cubans are ecstatic"
 Cigar-loving travelers won't have to hide their Cubans in their luggage anymore . Cubans can be found in the U.S. government's new policy .
 Tobacco products from Cuba are among the goods allowed under new trade normalization rules . President Obama announced the rules Wednesday . Tobacco products will be allowed under the rules .
 The eased restrictions mean that approved travelers will be able to bring home $100 of cigars . Approved travelers can now buy cigars for $100 .
 From the Bay of Pigs to the Baltimore Orioles, 50 years of U.S.-Cuba relations are remembered . 50 years ago, the United States and Cuba were united at the start of the war .
 President Obama brought up Cuba at the Summit of the Americas at the end of 2009 . President Obama made the comments at the summit . Obama has been criticized for his comments .
 Long-standing restrictions on travel and trade have been loosened in the past five years . They have continued to focus on improving relations since then .
 This week, an American held by Cuba for five years was brought home . The White House announced plans to open an embassy in Havana, Cuba .
 Mr Rangel said he was in the country with a medical association ""to exchange advancements that have been made"" on treatment for diabetes .
 The spin from Valerie Jarrett's White House is that the pope had something to do with what progressives have wanted to do for decades . Raul Castro Urges Obama To Use 'Executive Action' To Overrule Congress .
 Cuban dictator Raul Castro urged Obama to use ""executive action"" to bypass Congressional policy on Cuba . Castro spoke at the same time as President Obama's televised speech announcing normalization of relations with Cuba .
 Joanne Chesimard was convicted in the shooting death of a New Jersey state trooper in 1973 but later escaped from prison and fled to Cuba . She was convicted of killing the trooper but later fled to escape from prison .
 President Obama would have no reservations about visiting Cuba, White House says . Obama administration has resumed diplomatic talks with Castro regime in Cuba .
 Conservative columnist Charles Krauthammer wonders whether there's any tyrannical or anti-American regime to whom he won't grant one-sided concessions . Krauthmmer: The Obama administration's decision to open formal relations with Cuba is part of a broader trend .
 President Obama once understood that the embargo against Cuba was designed as leverage to push Cuban democratization . Krauthammer: Even President Obama himself once understood the embargo was designed to use as leverage .
 On Wednesday, the Castros suddenly obtained a comprehensive bailout — from the Obama administration . The Castros have been in the midst of financial turmoil .
 President Obama granted the regime everything on its wish list that was within his power to grant . A full lifting of the trade embargo requires congressional action .
 Full diplomatic relations will be established, Cuba's place on the list of terrorism sponsors reviewed . Restrictions on United States investment and most travel to Cuba will be lifted . Cuba will also be reviewed and restrictions lifted on U.S. investment in Cuba .
 Havana liberalization will provide Havana with a fresh source of desperately needed hard currency . It will eliminate U.S. leverage for political reforms . Cuba's political reforms will also eliminate United States leverage for reforms .
 President Obama's decision to reestablish full diplomatic relations between Cuba and the U.S. reflects his conviction that engagement with foreign adversaries is better than isolation . Obama's first inaugural address laid out in his inaugural address .
 Obama's historic decision means that two longtime antagonists will establish embassies in each other's capital and exchange ambassadors . The president himself described Wednesday as a ""unique history""
 Marco Rubio responded to Obama's announcement on Cuba today calling it 'just another concession to a tyranny' Rubio said it will do nothing but tighten the Cuban regime's grip on power for decades to come and significantly set back the hopes and dreams of the Cuban people .
 Shepard Smith reacts to Obama's Cuba decision, asks if U.S. will 'ruin' Havana . Shepard Smith asks if United States will "ruin" Havana .
 Fox News anchor Shepard Smith reacted to news that the U.S. was restoring diplomatic relations with Cuba . Smith asked if American capitalism would ""ruin"" the nation with fast-food restaurants and home improvement businesses .
 NBC Hails 'Momentous Day' of Obama Opening U.S. Relations with Cuba . Obama's Cuba relations with the island nation have been strained for years .
 Obama Is Worst Negotiator Since Carter, Maybe in Modern United States History . Obama is worst negotiator since Carter, maybe in modern U.S. history .
 Senator Marco Rubio slammed President Obama's decision to normalize U.S. relations with Cuba on Wednesday . Rubio called Obama the "worst negotiator" since Jimmy Carter, calling him the worst since Carter .
 Networks Barely Mention Brutality of Castro Regime or Cuba Being Communist . Networks barely mention brutality of Castro regime or Cuba being Communist. Networks bare bare barely mention brutalism of Castro .
 The major broadcast networks continued praising of the move by President Obama to seek normalized relations with Cuba .
 Good Morning America offered little in the way of criticism for President Obama's actions to normalize relations with Cuba .
 Mark Levin Brilliantly Exposes Obama's Blatant Undeniable Indisputable Hypocrisy On Cuba . Mark Levin brilliantly exposes Obama's Undevious Undenable Hypocrite On Cuba. Mark Levin: Obama's hypocrisy on Cuba .
 Mark Levin gave a brilliant monologue on Obama seeking to normalize relations with Cuba . Levin exposed the blatant hypocrisy in how Obama deals with evil dictatorships versus how he deals with America . Levin: Obama seeking normalization of Cuba relations is hypocritical .
 President Obama essentially released the three remaining Cuban spies in exchange for American Alan Gross . Alan Gross had been held hostage by the Cuban regime for over five years .
 Gross was imprisoned by the Castro regime for trying to help ordinary Cubans communicate with the outside world . Gross was a foreign aid worker imprisoned by Castro regime . Gross worked for Cubans in Cuba and was released from prison .
 President Obama confirmed the role of Pope Francis, a vocal critic of Western-style capitalism, in the deal . Pope Francis is a vocal opponent of capitalism .
 Once again, we are treated to a display of secret and deceptive government by the Obama administration, in this case designed to bolster an anti-American regime . The U.S. should be proud of its efforts to thwart the regime, the White House says .
 The announcement was made after Congress adjourned for the legislative session . The announcement comes after the session was adjourned .
 President Barack Obama announced Wednesday at the White House that the United States will move swiftly toward normalizing diplomatic relations with Cuba . The move follows more than a half-century of icy stares from the isolated communist country of Cuba .
 Cuba released American aid worker Alan Gross in the morning after five years in captivity, in a prisoner exchange with Havana that started a day of unprecedented U.S. action that will include lifting of America's cold-war trade embargo .
 Few could have predicted that communist regimes would win the day on December 17, 2014 . This year's events marked the beginning of a new year of freedom .
 Barack Obama promised to fundamentally transform America, but has done so so far . Barack Obama, promising to fundamentally change America, has not done so .
 His mentor, communist activist Frank Marshall Davis, would be proud of him, Davis says . He says he's proud of his achievements in his career .
 To make the world more prosperous, the U.S. must be less prosperous . The United States must make it less prosperous, says Sen. Ted Cruz .
 Washington technocrats, bureaucrats, and numerous party apparatchiks of both parties have decided America is in decline and should be managed instead of overcome . Assisting Barack Obama in this is the Washington technocracy, bureaucrats and party officials .
 Republicans react with outrage over Obama administration's move to normalize relations with Cuba . Some cast it as appeasement and the product of extortion by the communist Castro government .
 Marco Rubio, the son of Cuban immigrants, was perhaps the most ardent voice to denounce the administration . Rubio, a likely 2016 presidential contender, is a likely presidential contender .
 Republicans promised to try to derail the White House's efforts through their leverage in Congress . At least one GOP-leaning group, the United States Chamber of Commerce, welcomed the news .
 Pope Francis and the Vatican are involved in the negotiations with Cuba, a senior administration official says . Pope Francis is involved in negotiations with the Vatican, a source says . The Vatican and the White House are also involved in talks with Cuba .
 President Obama explained to Americans that they'll be able to send more money to Cuba in the future . President Obama announced changes to U.S. relations with the country .
 Marco Rubio criticizes President Obama for moving to ease US-Cuba relations . Rubio says President Obama's move is a violation of Cuban law . Rubio: "I'm not sure what's going to happen next"
 Rubio was reacting to the White House's decision to begin normalizing relations with Cuba following a prisoner swap . Rubio is a potential presidential candidate in 2016, a potential 2016 presidential candidate .
 Kerry also noted that at Obama's request the State Department will review its designation of Cuba as a terror state . Kerry: The State Dept. will review Cuba's designation as a terrorist state .
 President Obama has announced a change in U.S. policy in Cuba . Obama administration has been criticized for its policy on Cuba . Cuba has been a source of tension in the past .
 Lots of changes in the embargo that will mean plenty more cash for the Castros . The Castros are set to get lots more cash from the embargo .
 Castro brothers have pledged to let 53 political prisoners out, free one American spy, and free the American hostage Alan Gross . In exchange, the Castro brothers pledge to free Alan Gross and free 53 prisoners in exchange .
 As to real changes in the regime — changes in its foreign or domestic policies — none, says Mr. Ghitis . "None of the real changes have been made," he says .
 The U.S. and the Castro regime have been at odds for decades . Castro's regime has been at war with the United States since 1959 . The Castro regime is now at the center of the world's longest-running conflict .
 First Bergdahl, now Gross — Obama 'worst negotiator' since Jimmy Carter . Obama's "worst negotiator" since Carter, says Gross . Gross is a former Army Sgt. Sgt. Ryan Gross, who is now Gross .
 President Obama traded three Cuban spies for Alan Gross in exchange for Bowe Bergdahl . Obama has been criticized as the 'worst negotiator' as president since Jimmy Carter .
 Marco Rubio, Florida Republican, made the declaration Wednesday in the wake of an announced deal that will free Mr Gross, an American, from imprisonment in Cuba in exchange for three Cubans convicted of espionage . The deal was announced in the aftermath of an agreement that freed Mr Gross from Cuba in
 News of Gross's release and change to U.S. policy toward Cuba has swept through the streets of Little Havana . Gross's case has been the focus of the White House's Cuba policy .
 Cuban-Americans have flocked to Cafe Versailles, a political hotspot to trade opinions on the news . The Cuban-American community is a political hot spot in the U.S.
 Alan Gross was released from the communist country Wednesday following five years in prison . The Obama administration is moving to normalize diplomatic relations with Cuba . Alan Gross is the first American to be freed from Cuba .
 Sources say President Obama plans to announce the opening of a U.S. embassy in Havana . Obama also plans to call on Congress to lift the long-standing embargo .
 Obama spoke with Cuban leader Raul Castro for more than 45 minutes on Tuesday . It's the first substantive presidential-level discussion between the U.S. and Cuba since 1961 .
 Obama is building his legacy as a communist sympathizer and an enabler of petty tyrants and dictators . Obama's legacy is that he's building on a Communist sympathizer . Obama is also a supporter of dictators and tyrants .
 U.S. President Barack Obama does not have concrete plans to visit Cuba after restoring diplomatic relations with Havana . White House spokesman says he would not rule out a presidential visit . Obama has not ruled out a visit to Cuba .
 President Obama extended a hearty handshake to Cuba's iron-fisted dictator Raul Castro just as the latter was beating up dissidents back home on the eve of Human Rights Day . Obama extended the handshake to the dictator just as he beat up dissidents .
 Cuba remains the ACLU's ""Fantasy Island,"" where happy Marxist children play together in perfect harmony, and the state makes sure its citizens are cared for from cradle to grave . The ACLU says the state is responsible for the welfare of its citizens .
 ACLU wanted to keep the book on the bookshelves of a Florida school . Vamos a Cuba is a depiction of Cuba . The ACLU wanted the book to be kept in the school .
 Cuba has a reputation in Cuba as a tourist hotspot . But reality quickly gives way to harsh reality in the country's capital .
 9 representatives introduced a bill calling for an end to the 46-year-old ban on travel to Cuba . The bill was introduced by nine members of Congress .
 The Freedom to Travel to Cuba Act would allow American citizens to travel to Cuba for the first time since 1963 . The bill was introduced in the United States House of Representatives on Feb. 4 .
 President Obama poised to offer an olive branch to Cuba in an effort to repair the US's tattered reputation in Latin America . President Barack Obama is set to offer the Cuban government an opportunity to repair America's reputation .
 The White House has moved to ease some travel and trade restrictions as a cautious first step towards better ties with Havana . The move is raising hopes of an eventual lifting of the four-decade-old economic embargo .
 The biggest political shake-up in twenty years rattled Cuba's regime's regime . Obama proposed dropping some economic and travel sanctions on Cuba this week .
 The most prominent among the purged were the youngest and most reform-minded . They've all been replaced by diehard Stalinist septuagenarians with military and secret police backgrounds .
 Not since Ann Margaret's reaction to Conrad Birdie's kiss has anything been recorded to match these United States legislators' reaction to these meetings .
 Castro regime is one of the most brutal, ruthless and amoral regimes of our time . Castro regime was brutal and ruthless, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 While little mention of it is offered by the world media, due to their soft spot for murderers and thugs everywhere, the cruelty it embodies is no less true .
 The only time the media sees fit to heap scorn on anyone is when conservatives enact policies that defend innocents against terror or brutality . After all, the only time they see fit to he heap scorn is when they enact policies to protect innocents .
 Former Cuban leader Fidel Castro describes meeting with U.S. lawmakers as 'magnificent' He urges Washington to take the initiative to improve ties with Havana . Castro: Meeting with US lawmakers was a 'miracle'
 "When even those who dare to whisper a word of dissent to your absolute rule find themselves harassed, beaten, humiliated, and imprisoned. And when even those . dare to . whisper, they . dare whisper, you find yourself harassed and beaten . And when . those . who dare whisper
 Rep. Ruben Navarrette visited Cuba to meet Fidel Castro and Raul Castro . He met with Fidel Castro, Raul and other Cuban leaders .
 If anyone's thinking toward the communist state is stuck in the Cold War past, it is Ms. Liu . Liu: "If anyone thinks about the state of China, it's Ms Liu"
 The Lost City not only is a loving tribute to Havana and Cuban art and music, it is also a tribute to liberty, democracy and capitalism . It's also a love tribute to freedom and democracy in Cuba .
 In Castro's Cuba, it is a crime to meet to discuss the economy, to write letters to the government, to report on political developments, to speak to international reporters, to advocate human rights, to visit friends or relatives outside your local area of residence without government permission .
 Jimmy Carter is the self-appointed globetrotter on behalf of human rights . Jimmy Carter: "I'm a human rights crusader. I'm a crusader for human rights"
 Veneration of evil. continues to be a symbol of freedom and revolutionary fervour and purity for people who can't read or think . Venerations of evil . continues .
 Leftie morons from Pierre Trudeau to Michael Moore venerate the Cuban totalitarian state, it is just a prison masquerading as a nation . Despite the fact lefties from Pierre . Trudeau and Michael Moore have venerated the state of Cuba, it's just a jail .
 Cuba was a colony of the Soviet Union, exchanging sugar for fighter planes . The Cuban government failed miserably, thus consigning Cuba to a future as a colony . Cuba's President George W. Bush tried to pull Cuba from Cuba .
 To depict Havana streets on New Year's Eve 1958, Coppola cast more people than stampeded through a battle scene in Braveheart . To depict the streets of Havana streets in 1958, the film was set in Havana, Cuba .
 The reality, up close, is that it's the longest-running failure in the New World . Cuban prisons have been a failure in Cuba for decades .
 Some are held captive in tiny, windowless cells . Others are confined in over-crowded and squalid dormitories . Some have been held in tiny cells .
 Most go without basic health care and food staples; a few undergo regular beatings . A few go without regular health care, food staples . Most undergo beatings, some go without food and health care .
 All are denied basic religious freedoms, and none has been visited by members of the International Red Cross . None of the refugees have visited by the Red Cross, which has not visited the country .
 Fidel Castro likes to boast of his country's 70,000 doctors, but admits ""tens of thousands"" of them have been sent abroad . Fidel Castro says he has sent thousands of doctors to work abroad .
 Seven members of the Congressional Black Caucus returned from a visit to Cuba . They met with the dictators of Cuba, Fidel and Raul Castro .
 Fidel Castro is the longest reigning dictator in the world . He deprived an entire generation of Cubans of the most fundamental human rights . Now Open Cuba's Prisons .
 President Obama's decision this week to ease some parts of the embargo against Cuba is being hailed as a first step toward altering a U.S. policy that has prevailed for a half-century without unseating Fidel Castro . Cuba has prevailed in Cuba for 50 years .
 President Barack Obama wants Havana to make the next move to improve U.S.-Cuba relations . Obama says he needs to see signs of changes on the island before he makes more overtures .
 Illinois Representative Bobby Rush extolled Raul Castro for his ""sense of humor"" and the way he ""laughed at himself"" and how ""down-to-earth"" and ""kind"" he was .
 Rush snapped that he was engaging in a ""double standard"" and called it ""good business sense"" not to let human rights get in the way of increased trade . When a reporter asked about Cuba's human rights record, Rush snapped .
 The Congressional Black Caucus's recent trip to Cuba was utterly expected . The trip was expected to be a major success for the Black Caucus .
 Now there is nothing wrong with visiting Cuba and visiting Cuba is nothing sacrosanct about America's economic embargo . Now there are no restrictions on visiting Cuba or visiting Cuba .
 You can question U.S. Cuba policy without cozying up to Castro . But you can rationally question the United States Cuba policy . You can also question the policy of the Castro regime in Cuba .
 The CBC failed to meet with a single dissident on an island with a record of making dissidents disappear . It handed El Jefe his best press in years .
 Arlen Specter has visited Cuba and met with Fidel Castro three times in the past 9 years . Specter seems quite proud of his record of three visits to Cuba .
 Specter presented Fidel Castro with a FDNY cap shortly after the 9/11 terrorist attack . Specter made a big show of presenting Castro with an FDNY hat .
 Celebrities, journalists, and others have long gushed with admiration for Cuba's communist despot .
 Muñoz dined with Cuban dictator Fidel Castro at least once . He also met with Castro at the same time .
 I have written a fair amount about Fidel Castro, over the years, and a fair bit about Jimmy Carter, too . I have also written about Fidel and Jimmy Carter .
 In the months that followed, Carter slashed the defense budget, scrapped the B-1 bomber, welcomed the Sandinista coup in Nicaragua, and launched diplomatic relations with Cuba's dictator, Fidel Castro . Carter's defense budget was slashed in the months following the coup .
 A return to Carter's Cuba legacy may be an even worse experience, because of the unmistakable whiff of treason . We've discussed Jimmy Carter's legacy of friendship and warm support for the world's dictators many times already .
 Journalists and celebrities have showered Cuba's despot with praise for decades, extolling his virtues . If sycophancy were an Olympic sport, they would have walked off with the gold .
 Barack Obama's call for action on climate change has received strong praise from Fidel Castro . Obama's admission that rich nations have a particular responsibility to lead has been praised by Castro . Castro says rich nations should lead the fight against climate change .
 Listen up to the words of the second most dedicated Marxist in our Hemisphere . Listen up . The second most devoted Marxist in the Hemisphere .
 Everyone else seems to be bailing on Barack Obama these days, but not the Castro regime . The Castro regime is still in control of Cuba . Castro's regime has been in the grip of the U.S.
 In a memo to CNN anchors, CNN brass laid down the line that should be taken when talking about the resignation . CNN brass lays out the line to talk about resignation .
 liberals in the U.S. media have condemned such abuses when perpetrated by dictators such as Chile's Augusto Pinochet . Yet they inexplicably remain enchanted with Castro and his socialist revolution .
 For more than half a century, positive profiles of Castro have appeared in U.S. papers . The Castro family has been prominent in Cuba for decades .
 CBS's 60 Minutes has run a segment on Elian Gonzalez, five years after the Clinton administration sent him back to the communist prison island .
 He had come to America as a refugee, without his father, who was back in Cuba and under pressure from the communist regime to demand him back . He was forced to move to the U.S. in order to avoid extradition to Cuba .
 The Clinton administration complied, seizing the little boy at the point of a gun . The boy was seized by the Clinton administration at the time .
 It made a mockery of America's reputation as a free society open to refugees fleeing persecution, it said . It made the mockery of the U.S. reputation as an open society, it added .
 CNN is an organization that lends legitimacy to a corrupt regime and sneers at the exile community in Miami . To many Cuban Americans, CNN is the ""Castro News Network""
 Journalism is never more amoral than when dictators are the mandatory ""get" for a news puff piece . Journalism is always more ammoral than when . dictators are . mandatory ""gets"" for news puff pieces .
 Castro's fiefdom wins the price ""for most journalists jailed per-capita on earth on earth" Castro wins the prize for most journalists per-capsita .
 Cuba today holds 20 percent of the world's jailed journalists . Reporters Without Borders says Cuba holds 20 per cent of world's jailed journalists .
 A few words about Elian Gonzalez April 22, 2000, is a date that has been flushed down the news media memory hole . Gonzalez was killed in a car crash in April 2000 . Gonzalez: "It's a good thing for the world to remember"
 The Clinton administration used the executive branch's broad power over immigration to send a 6-year-old boy back to a communist dictatorship . The boy was sent back to the communist dictatorship by the Clinton administration .
 Most Americans approved of the Clinton-Castro shanghaiing of Elian Gonzalez . Most of the time, most of them approved of Clinton's decision to remove Elian from Cuba .
 Dan Rather interviewed Elian's father Juan Miguel by Dan Rather on 60 Minutes . Dan Rather played a key role in this expert snookering of America . A 60 Minutes ""interview"" of Juan Miguel was key to the success of Elian and Elian .
 60 Minutes on April 6th 2000 edition of 60 Minutes . Father pleading to be allowed to have his motherless son accompany him back to Cuba .
 It was the best thing they could find in this surreal island without boats without boats . The island is now uninhabited and has a population of 1,000 people .
 Elian's mom clutched her son as the boat sank . Like a scene right out of Hollywood, a storm hit, waves began crashing, the motor failed and the escapees bailed water .
 Elian was placed in some sort of inner tube before passing out from exhaustion . Elian passed out of exhaustion after being placed in inner tube .
 He was brought safely to U.S. shores, vindicating the sacrifice his mother made . His mother's sacrifice was vindicating her sacrifice .
 Elian Gonzalez made headlines 14 years ago when his mother died while journeying from Cuba to the U.S. He said America was to blame for his loss . Gonzalez's mother died in Cuba, sparking a custody battle .
 Elian Gonzalez would like to return to the United States, he tells ABC News in an exclusive interview . Gonzalez: "I want to go back to the U.S. where I was born," he says . Gonzalez says he wants to see his dream come true .
 Gonzalez was found floating off Florida's coast in 1999 . He was in the boat he was in with his mother with her when it capsized . Gonzalez was later found floating in the ocean .
 The 6-year-old boy found himself at the center of a tug of war between Cuba and the U.S. over whether he should remain in Cuba or be returned to his father in Cuba . Gonzalez is staying with his uncle in Miami .
 A decade ago, Elián González was a six-year-old Cuban boy in Miami's Little Havana . It's hard to imagine that a decade ago he and so many other journalists, as well as millions of readers and viewers around the world, spent five months outside a
 His media code name, we can reveal now, was The Rabbit — as in, ""The Rabbit's out!"" — which jaded television cameramen shouted whenever Elian stepped into the yard . Elian's media code-name, we . reveal, was "The Rabbit"
 The first image that comes to the mind of many Americans isn't that of Brian Terry, or of Black Panthers outside polling places, but of a screaming child staring down the barrel of a rifle . As we count down Eric Holder's greatest hits, the first image is that of a child
 U.S. federal agents executed a full-blown raid on the home of five-year-old Elian Gonzalez . Elian and his father were sent back to Cuba .
 Hearing Eric Holder give a farewell speech was welcome in some circles . Eric Holder will be leaving as the Attorney General .
 "I was never a fan of his because he was in my opinion always more of a politician than someone with the responsibility to enforce the laws of the nation," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter says he was "never a fan" of his predecessor .
 Holder oversaw the seizure of Elian Gonzalez, a seven-year-old whose mother had died in an effort to escape Cuba and find sanctuary in the U.S. Holder was the deputy attorney general under Janet Reno in 2000 .
 Holder was doing what he had to do after a court ruled that Gonzalez be returned to his father in Cuba . I thought then and still do that Gonzalez should have been allowed to remain with his U.S. relatives .
 The U.S. government has refused to act decisively to control the horde of children entering the US via Mexico from Central America . The United States government had no compunctions about expelling a helpless child back to terrible conditions .
 In that case, the Feds were wrong to send a child back to a communist dictatorship, where he lives today, a member of the Union of Young Communists, propagandist for the regime, and personal ""friend"" of Fidel Castro . The Feds sent a child to a
 Elian Gonzalez, 7, was a 7-year-old immigrant to the U.S. State Department condemns Stalinist regime as an official ""state-sponsor of terrorism" State Department: "Stalinist regime" asked U.K. government to deport Elian .
 The United States Justice department snapped to attention and acted upon Fidel Castro's request . Fidel Castro asked the U.S. Justice Department to act upon his request .
 Elian Gonzalez's family — as demonstrated for over a decade — is completely law-abiding. Elian's family, as well as his family, is law abiding, he says . Gonzalez: "I'm not afraid to go to jail. I'm not scared to go. I
 The militarization of the police does not occur instantaneously, but is the cumulative result of each military tool amassed . Each protester is silenced based on his political views, or each wrongful search that goes unchallenged .
 The world's longest-reigning dictator visits a 12-year-old boy every year for his birthday . If the normal, average, typical boy has a birthday, that is if he has a visit from the dictator .
 Elian Gonzalez was shipped into the waiting arms of Fidel Castro in 2000 . Gonzalez was the first person to be taken into custody by the Castro regime .
 The delivery man was Bill Clinton, who used a SWAT team armed with submachine guns to assure everyone's compliance . Elian Gonzalez joins Cuba's youth Communists .
 The Cuban boy at the center of an international custody battle eight years ago has joined Cuba's Young Communist Union . The boy was at center of a custody battle with the Cuban government . He has since been reunited with his parents .
 Elian Gonzalez says he will never let down ex-President Fidel Castro and his brother Raul Castro . Elian said he will not let down former President Fidel Castro or his brother . Gonzalez: "I will never be able to let down Fidel Castro"
 The 14-year-old joins Cuba's Young Communist Union, Associated Press reports .
 This is barely enough time to wake up and gather your wits in order to deal with a threatening, armed contingent wearing body armor and banging at the door . The doorbell sounds like a wake-up alarm alarm .
 Lazaro Gonzales came into our lives nearly 10 years ago, at the start of the 21st Century . Elian's effervescent uncle, Lazaro, is Elian and his wife's favourite uncle . He came into the lives of Elian in his early 20th Century
 Lazaro famously said he wouldn't hand over Elian to Janet Reno . Janet Reno's federal agents were on their way to his town outside Miami to seize young Elian .
 Cuba has released photos of one-time exile cause celebre Elian Gonzalez wearing an olive-green military school uniform . Gonzalez was attending a Young Communist Union congress .
 The timing of the photo-release may coincide with the 11th anniversary of Elian's shanghaiing from the U.S. which hits on the 22nd of this month . Bill Clinton compares the case to kidnapping .
 Former President Bill Clinton says he has no regrets over sending Elian Gonzalez back to Cuba . Clinton would order a federal raid on Little Havana all over again, he says .
 Castro clapped his hands and his MSM minions snapped to attention on Dec. 5th, 1999 . Then on Dec 5th of 1999, Castro's supporters clapped their hands . Castro was the president of the United States in 1999 .
 Within weeks Clinton's INS had turned its initial decision on the issue on its head . Within weeks, the INS had changed its original decision on an initial decision .
 Within months this same INS was kicking down Lazaro's door, pummeling camera men and elderly ladies to the ground with jackboots and machine guns . Within months, the INS was pummelling camera men, elderly ladies, and wrenching a screaming Elian from his legal
 Nearly twelve years have passed since he was pulled from a closet by a masked machine gun wielding U.S. agent . He was pulled out of a closet with a machine gun by a United States agent .
 Elian Gonzalez, the Cuban boy who survived a perilous raft journey that killed his mother, is now an adult . Gonzalez became a symbol of troubled relations between the U.S. and Cuba .
 The inn's Easter basket was made by the inn's hostess, a little Easter basket . "I looked down at a little basket the inn hostess had made and I was reminded this was Easter day," she said .
 The extraction of a child by brute force happened at an hour when most Americans were asleep . The sky was dark where they were broadcasting because the U.S. military was broadcasting .
 He was point man in kidnapping of Elian Gonzalez, who was kidnapped in 2007 . He was also point man behind the kidnapping of the Mexican-born teen .
 Holder applied for a court order to seize the boy from his legal guardian . Holder went ahead with the operation without one, then baldly denied that Elian was seized at gunpoint . Holder denied that the boy was seized in a gunpoint, saying it was not at gun point .
 "Elian II,"" the sequel we hoped never to see, is what fathers' groups are calling a Miami case . The case highlights our confusion about paternal rights in child custody battles .
 A 5-year-old Cuban girl, her biological father in Cuba, her mentally unstable mother in the U.S., a passel of relatives, therapists, guardians ad litem, activist attorneys and a wealthy, influential Cuban-American foster family . This time, the dispute revolves