 The book's usual periodization, according to which it came together in the late 1940s and persisted until the late 1960s when it unraveled amidst the trauma of the Vietnam War, fits well with a common theory of change in ideas .
 Theory expects stasis until a substantial unexpected failure discredits dominant ideas and unsettles dominant coalitions . That theory is false, but it is true in the military, it says .
 Data reveal standard history of this important case to be wrong . However, systematic data reveal the standard history is wrong .
 A large-scale content analysis of newspaper editorials on foreign affairs shows the Cold War narrative was narrower than conventional accounts suggest . This article shows that it did not coalesce until well into the 1950s, and that it began to erode even before the Vietnam War’s American
 To make sense of this puzzle, I develop an alternative theory of the rise and fall of the narratives that underpin and structure debate over national security . Theories that underpin national security debate are key to understanding national security, he says .
 This hard and important case suggests the need to rethink the relationship between success, failure, and change in dominant narratives of national security . The case suggests that the U.S. should rethink its national security narratives .
 This project could not have been completed without the assistance of Kathryn Chylla, Lindsey Cunneen, Giovanni Mantilla, Ashley Nord and Ashley Nord .
 After around 1948, alternatives to militarized global containment could not get a hearing . By this account, after around 1948,. alternatives to the militarized system could not be heard, according to the account .
 This entrenched policy consensus allegedly dragged the U.S. into a disastrous war in Vietnam . It unraveled amidst the trauma of that war . The U.N. policy was allegedly dragged into Vietnam .
 The narrative of national security that we call the Cold War consensus has not been studied rigorously . However, the narrative of Cold War security has not yet been looked rigorously, says CNN's John Sutter .
 More systematic data reveal the standard history of this important case to be wrong . The case was wrong, says the author of the book, but it was wrong .
 The Cold War narrative was narrower than conventional accounts suggest, author says . He says it did not become dominant until the early 1950s, and that its dominant position began to erode in the early 1960s .
 Rethinking what the Cold War narrative was and when it consolidated and collapsed poses a substantial theoretical puzzle as well . But rethinking what Cold War was and what it was when it collapsed poses substantial theoretical puzzles as well as theoretical puzzle .
 A well-established theory attributes major change in ideas and discourses to substantial, unexpected, and unwelcome policy failures . Policy success, in contrast, impedes change, since prevailing ideas then seem to make adequate sense of reality . Policy failure is a policy failure that impedes real change,
 The Cold War narrative fell from its dominant perch long before Americans rejected the Vietnam War and that it surprisingly achieved its dominance during the bloody Korean stalemate . It fits less comfortably, however, with my data, which show that Cold War narratives fell .
 To make sense of this pattern, I develop an alternative theory rooted in the dynamics of the public narrative and the domestic politics of the battlefield . I develop a theory of public narrative, domestic politics and the battlefield.
 Events are not productively theorized as responses to exogenous shock, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says events do not speak for themselves, but their purported lessons are the product of interpretation by political actors .
 For this conventional view of the Cold War consensus, see, among others, Allison 1970–71; Gelb and Betts 1979, chap. chap. For this view of Cold War views, see: Allison 1970s–71 .
 For general discussion, see Capoccoccia and Kelemen 2007; and Pierson 2004 . For general discussions, see . Capocca and Keelemen 2007, and Capoccia .
 Their dominance endures as long as leading political and cultural elites continue to reproduce them . Their dominance erodes when elites publicly challenge key tenets, and erode when challenged .
 Early in an uncertain military campaign, battlefield setbacks give both doves and hawks incentives to criticize the war’s conduct while reaffirming the underlying narrative . However, early in a military campaign early in the war, battlefield losses give both critics of the war's conduct an incentive to
 Opposition doves pull rhetorical punches to avoid bearing political costs of wartime criticism . Opponents hawks are moved by the prospect of gain, but the effect is the same . Opposition hawks move by prospect of gaining gain .
 In short, when it comes to public narratives of national security, the conventional wisdom has it backward, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "In short, national security is not about national security"
 This theory’s expectations and mechanisms are consistent with the quantitative content analysis of newspaper editorials as well as with the Cold War, author says . This theory is consistent with a quantitative analysis of editorials and Cold War evidence .
 The Korean War’s high costs might have undermined the Cold War globalism in whose name the U.S. had gone to war . The war's high costs may have undermined globalism, the author says .
 They helped consolidate the global Cold War they had long feared would yield an imperial presidency and an imposing national-security state . They thus helped consolidate a Cold War that they had hoped would yield a imperial presidency .
 GOP hawks took the crisis and its resolution as proof of that narrative’s core propositions . Republican hawks accordingly took it as proof to their core proposition of that .
 Kennedy had long hewed in public to the Cold War narrative despite the more nuanced views he expressed in private . The missile crisis opened space for Kennedy to deviate publicly from that narrative and to lay the narrative foundation for détente .
 This revisionist account of the Cold War narrative is intrinsically important, for it speaks to enduring questions . It speaks to the origins of America’s national-security state to the conditions of possibility for détente to the sources of United States intervention in Vietnam .
 Hardly questioned narratives often structure nations’ debates over security and foreign policy . Hardly questioning narratives often often structure nation’s debates over foreign policy.
 Even Legro, in his work on states’ ideas about international society, focuses on collective “causal beliefs” about the “effective means for achieving interests” in international politics, he says . Legro: "Even Legro focuses on state’s
 The narrative underpinnings of policy debate have received far less attention, yet are arguably more important . The narrative of the policy debate has received far more attention than it has received .
 The conventional view is that a dominant Cold War narrative took shape in the late 1940s . But the conventional view has been that the Cold War began in the 1950s . This is not the case for the U.S. to engage in a new Cold War era .
 Lasting around two decades, it unraveled during the Vietnam War and failed to reemerge even as détente flickered in the mid-1970s .
 Such opposed stances persist because we lack systematic evidence regarding what the consensus was, when it consolidated, and when it collapsed . Such opposing views persist because of lack of systematic evidence, such as when it was consolidated and when that collapsed .
 The Cold War consensus was a public discursive code that U.S. policymaking elites felt compelled to adhere to in their public pronouncements, regardless of their private qualms . It was the Cold War code that American policymakers felt compelled by the code .
 Gelb blamed the consensus for driving the U.S. into Vietnam . Gelb knew many Washington insiders had severe misgivings about key pillars of the consensus and its application to Southeast Asia . But he also saw few who were willing to give public voice to their private dissent .
 Despite persistent doubts at the highest levels of government that global communism was “a highly coordinated, conspiratorial, malevolent force” and that local communists were mere ciphers doing Moscow’s bidding, Gaddis has claimed that no U.S. official ever really
 See also Allison 1970–71; Gelb and Betts 1979, chap., chap.; and Holsti and Rosenau 1984 . See also Gelb, Betts, Rosenau, and Rosenbergau, respectively .
 They could not say otherwise if they wished to be taken seriously, or so they thought . But they were taken seriously by the British government .
 Public narratives are ubiquitous because meaning-making is essential to the human condition and because legitimation is the life blood of politics . Public discursive codes normally take a narrative form,11 for stories are vehicles through which human beings define their reality and link thought to action .
 Only some narratives, however, become dominant, an accepted ‘common sense’ about the world,14 . They set the boundaries of what actors can legitimately articulate in public, what they can collectively (though not individually) imagine, and what is politically possible .
 As the terrain on which political battle takes place, dominant public narratives do not fully smother contestation but channel it . Dominant public narratives are not smothering contestation, but channeling it, writes Andrew Hammond .
 National security policy is a key part of national security policy, author says . National security policies privilege a range of policies and impede legitimation of others, he says .
 As a dominant narrative, the Cold War consensus limited what policy options could be legitimately articulated . The Cold War was the dominant narrative of the U.S. policy .
 Throughout the Cold War, there was "a workable dissensus" over how communism could best be combated . The Cold War was divided on how to defeat communism via trade and aid .
 Debate swirled even at the consensus’s alleged apex in the 1950s over the advisability of negotiating with the Soviet Union, the 11.5-year-old .
 Given space constraints, I cannot elucidate the nature of the narrative or situate my conceptualization in the literature . I cannot situate the conceptualization of my work in this article .
 On legitimation and foreign policy, see Barnett 1998; Goddard 2009; and Jackson 2006 . Barnett 1998, Goddard 2009, and Barnett 2006, respectively, on legitimation, foreign policy .
 This is not to say that the average voter, newspaper reader, or advertiser, pays close attention to whether politicians and editorialists are conforming to the dominant narrative .
 On elite cuing in public opinion formation, see Page and Shapiro 1992; and Zaller 1992 . See Page, Shapiro and Shapiro for more details .
 One cannot apprehend this dominant narrative by examining congressional voting patterns on defense expenditures and foreign assistance, binding alliances, and military interventions . The policies associated with militarized, unselective containment can be seen in the U.S.
 One cannot cite debate over policy as evidence of the consensus passing . One can't cite debate on policy as proof of passing .
 Polls are not able to identify a dominant narrative by analyzing individuals’ beliefs revealed through opinion polls . Nor can be identified by analyzing people’s beliefs revealed in opinion polls, experts say .
 Polling procedures were flawed in the 1950s, they could not document that opinion had become more fractured, they said . They admitted that, because sampling procedures had been flawed, they couldn't properly document the fractured opinion .
 Opinion polls are not neutral instruments for gauging the public’s views, David Gergen says . Opinion polls should be used to gauge public opinion, he says . Polls should be neutral instruments, he adds .
 Pollsters operate within the bounds of the respectable, and they embed narrative presuppositions in their questions . Pollsters use a narrative framework to make their decisions . Pollster: "Pollsters operate in an effort to find out what people are thinking about"
 They are better at detecting cleavages than establishing zones of consensus and identifying the limits of the legitimate . They're better at finding out where the limits are, rather than establishing consensus .
 The Cold War narrative’s dominance was rooted less in what individuals truly believed than in the stances they thought they could legitimately defend in public . Second, and even more important, the Cold War was rooted in the fact that individuals believed in public statements .
 One cannot ascertain whether a public narrative is dominant by looking to only a single source, such as official government pronouncements, since that narrative may not be shared . Other narratives may retain legitimate standing . As a result, one cannot determine whether a . public narrative has a dominant standing .
 One can't look to politicians or media that address only narrow constituencies, since broader audiences might ignore or dismiss their views . Nor can one look to politics or media to address broader audiences, since they might ignore their views.
 One should look to a body of elite discourse present over the entire period to make possible comparisons over time . One should also look to the body of elites present over time to compare the discourse .
 One should observe the presence or absence of a dominant narrative in a corpus of elite discourse that is relatively consistent and drawn from multiple sources .
 These sources should be within the pale but occupy distant, and ideally extreme, positions on the spectrum . They should occupy distant but ideally extreme positions on that spectrum .
 See Holsti and Rosenau 1984; Russett and Hanson 1975; and Wittkopf 1990 . See Holstsi and . Rosenau . 1984 . Russett . Hanson 1975, Russett, Hanson 1975 . 1975 . Wittksopf .
 The length, style, and daily number of editorials varied between the two newspapers . Both ran editorials on what they saw as the major issues of the day, including foreign affairs .
 46. percent of the editorials come from the Tribune and 53. percent from the Times . Overall, 46. per cent of editorials are written by the Times and the Tribune .
 I look to these editorials as reflections of a potentially dominant narrative and the changes it underwent, not as influential sources of narrative change, I say . The editorials are reflections of potential dominant narratives, not influential sources, I look at them .
 Major newspapers’ editorial stances appear to follow national politicians in their ideological camp and have little impact on the median member of Congress . Major newspapers' editorial stances follow national politics in ideological camp .
 Based on existing catalogs of the Cold War consensus’ axioms, I constructed a fourteen-point questionnaire on the editorial’s central concern, its representations of communist powers and superpower competition, its portrait of United States allies, its stance on the domino theory, and
 Human coders completed the questionnaire for each editorial in the database, with double-blind coding to establish intercoder reliability . Double-blind codes were used to establish reliability .
 Because of the interpretive demands, intercoder reliability rates are lower than ideal but nevertheless quite strong . Intercoding reliability rates have been much higher than ideal, but still strong .
 This is the first time anyone has disaggregated the Cold War narrative into its possible components and traced their prominence in public elite discourse .
 This method makes it possible to establish whether there was a dominant Cold War narrative in the United States, what it consisted of, when it consolidated, and when it collapsed . This method is possible to determine whether the U.S. was at the center of the Cold War .
 Because of the project’s extensiveness, double-blind coding was not conducted for the full run of both newspapers . Double-blind codes were not used for the run of the newspapers .
 An additional coder analyzed the first twenty editorials per year from each newspaper . At least 10 percent and sometimes 50 percent of a given year’s editorials .
 Intercoder reliability tests indicate an average agreement of 78.04 percent across all questionnaire items . The reliability of the reliability tests is based on reliability of all the questions .
 Cohen’s kappa scores on individual items ranged from a low of .2337 to a high of .6656, with an average of .49 . Cohen's kappa score is .49, with a low .37 .
 I also calculated other measures of intercoder reliability, such as Scott’s pi and Krippendorff's alpha, to measure reliability of intercode reliability .
 In decomposing the Cold War narrative into its elements and abstracting from specific episodes, the questionnaire deemphasizes plot in favor of protagonist . The questionnaire deemsphasizes the plot and emphasizes the protagonist .
 It does, however, capture general plot lines in its examination of editorials for representations of, among others, superpower competition, and the domino theory, it says .
 First, the questionnaire represents the Cold War narrative’s farthest possible reach . First, it was a Cold War questionnaire . It was sent to the White House by President Richard Nixon .
 I drew from a wide range of secondary sources, and the resulting list of questionnaire items is inclusive and extensive . To design it, I drew . From the questionnaire items, you can fill in with questions about your knowledge .
 I am unfamiliar with any elements commonly viewed as part of the Cold War consensus that do not appear on the questionnaire . I'm not sure if any elements of the consensus that don't appear to appear on this questionnaire are relevant .
 National Security Narrative can't reasonably speak of a dominant national security narrative if either of these two newspapers regularly depart from it . Second, we cannot reasonably speak .
 The Times was, for much of the period under study, tightly tied to the national establishment . It had reporting resources that dwarfed its competitors, and was the only newspaper elites felt compelled to read .
 Although the Tribune was not in the Times’s league, it was a highly regarded regional paper with a national profile . It was not the Times's league, but it was known for its regional profile .
 Both operated within the bounds of legitimate discourse, and were acutely sensitive to how their reading publics and, crucially, advertisers responded to their editorial stances .
 The two newspapers were unusually ideologically consistent, especially on foreign affairs .
 One cannot classify a narrative as dominant if either the nation’s paper of record or the heartland’�s spokesperson deviated from it . One cannot be classified as dominant in a narrative if both the paper and the president deviate from it.
 Third, these newspapers represent the boundaries of legitimate American views of the global scene . Fourth, these papers represent legitimate U.S. views on the world's global scene, they say .
 I cannot discount this possibility fully without surveying a broader range of news outlets and undertaking a similar content analysis . This is not the first time I have seen this type of analysis .
 coding other newspapers would be prohibitively expensive, and it's not obvious what other newspapers one should consult, for alternatives lacked long-standing national status and/or ideological consistency . coding other papers would be expensive, but coding them would be difficult .
 Content Analysis yields several novel empirical claims regarding the dynamics of the Cold War narrative . Content Analysis Findings yield novel empirical findings on Cold War's dynamics .
 This narrow narrative achieved dominance later than the conventional wisdom claims . Second, this narrow narrative was dominant in the late 1940s, but into the 1950s. Third, the narrow narrative had dominance in the 1940s.
 Third, its dominance began to erode in the early 1960s, before the U.S. committed substantial forces to the defense of South Vietnam .
 First, there was a dominant Cold War narrative, or consensus, in the 1950s, but it was narrow . Second, the consensus was narrow. Third, the Cold War was a Cold War-era Cold War.
 The two newspapers’ editorials largely moved in lockstep regarding the centrality of superpower competition for global politics . On this issue, the gap between them was small and stable .
 The Times had much greater faith than the Tribune in the U.S. allies, in the utility of foreign aid, and in the need for and virtues of leadership in world affairs .
 This is strikingly reflected in the paltry amount of editorial coverage the Tribune devoted, relative to the Times, to narrating the Cold War .
 Between 1948 and 1955, 48. percent of foreign affairs editorials in the Times identified the character of the leading communist powers, compared with 28. percent in the Tribune . Over that span, 25. percent referred to the perils of states going communist, compared .
 Between 1948 and 1952, 44. percent of foreign affairs editorials in the Times presented a view of Western–Soviet bloc relations . Only 23. percent in the 36. percent section of the Times' foreign affairs section presented such a view .
 I summarize many of the content analysis findings . Because of space limitations, I summarize some of the findings .
 Further supporting data and graphical representations are in the online appendix . The study was originally published in 1996 .
 Important exceptions in the literature include Fordham 1998; and Snyder 1991 . Important exceptions to the literature have been made in recent years .
 The Tribune hewed to the traditional Cold War narrative, hardly diverging from its 1950s stance, whereas the Times deviated substantially .
 They emerged before leading figures in Congress, and before the U.S. people, opposed the Vietnam War . But they emerged before the Americanization of the war in 1965, even before the war began .
 As the Vietnam War dragged on, there was even less agreement on representations of the Communist other . The trend predates the war, but it predates it .
 Differences between liberal internationalists at the Times and their conservative counterparts at the Tribune were real and growing by the early 1960s . The former did not adopt editorial stances diametrically opposed to the erstwhile consensus .
 Content analysis challenges the conventional historical narrative and periodization of the Cold War consensus . Contending Explanations challenge the conventional Cold War narrative of Cold War .
 By this account, psychological, institutional, and social mechanisms mutually reinforce 38.5% of 38.6% of a person's views .
 For corresponding figures on the unity of communist powers and the domino theory, see the online appendix . For . corresponding figures, the figures are based on .
 Communist powers stasis with respect to national security, as in other domains . Aggressiveness of Communist powers is stasis, says U.S. President Obama .
 Only during “critical junctures’s” can agents make meaningful choices that set a new course, experts say . Only during those ‘critical juncents’ can make meaningful decisions, they say. Only during critical junctaries, agents must make meaningful
 Scholars commonly invoke an exogenous shock that punctures stable equilibria and drives change in institutions and paradigms . To explain how such moments of structural slack arise, scholars commonly invoke exogenous shocks .
 In the national security arena, this normally takes the form of substantial battlefield defeat . The U.S. is losing ground in Iraq and Afghanistan, says President Obama .
 Legro argues that a necessary condition for the breakdown of dominant conceptions of how states should relate to international society is unexpected large-scale failure . Success, even when unanticipated, yields no impetus for change, he says .
 This theory cannot make sense of the Cold War narrative that coalesced in the early 1950s, amidst a frustrating war in Korea, and that collapsed a decade later, when there was no unsettling shock . This theory can't make sense .
 National security narratives might reflect global realities, as structural realists argue . West-Communist relations might be key to national security narratives, as realists would argue .
 Perhaps the Cold War narrative became dominant because it mirrored the bipolar structure of international politics, aggressive Soviet behavior, and tightly controlled Soviet orbit . Perhaps it lost its grip on U.S. national security debate because it was out of step with developments such as the SinoSoviet split and Soviet
 The dominant Cold War narrative came together only around Joseph Stalin’s death, and it was strongest afterward . Under Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet bloc was becoming more diverse and Soviet policy growing tolerant of difference .
 structural realists, as confirmed materialists, would not put much stock in narratives . This is a fair extrapolation from the logic of the theory, says the author .
 Neoclassical realists agree that the international system yields clear imperatives that states should obey . But they would acknowledge the possibility that sometimes, and even often, dominant narratives of national security deviate from the system’s objective lessons .
 Third, perhaps national security narratives shift course along with presidential administration . Fourth, perhaps perhaps, perhaps the nation's national security narrative shift course .
 When new presidents come into office, they often bring a different vision of global politics, conception of the national interest, and foreign policy priorities . The new president comes from another political party, especially when he is from another party .
 Leaving aside the partisan account’s merits, it does not fit the Cold War narrative's dynamics . Leaving aside its merits, the president's account is not a partisan account of the war .
 The key periods of change do not correspond to changes of presidential administration or party control of the White House . The key period of change is not corresponded to changes in administration or political parties .
 Some key changes have occurred during times of partisan presidential stability . Those have been too frequent, and some key changes are too frequent . President Barack Obama has been in office since 2001 .
 The puzzle of the Cold War narrative’s rise and fall is all the greater when one considers the events surrounding the nodal periods of change . The puzzle is greater when considering events surrounding those nodal times of change, says CNN's John Sutter .
 The consensus consolidated amidst military failure, and began to erode after victory in a major episode of coercive diplomacy . The consensus was formed in the aftermath of the collapse of the West .
 The Cold War narrative rose to dominance not despite but because of the poor U.S. performance in Korea . Its dominance slipped not despite, but because, the seemingly one-sided United States triumph over the USSR in Cuba .
 Both realist and historical institutionalist accounts of change are typically insufficiently sensitive to politics . Public Narrative and the Politics of the Battlefield are critical of the public narrative .
 Realists and institutionalists differ over how much evidence is required before learning occurs . Realists implicitly adopt rationalist models of belief updating . Institutionalists believe all institutions and discourses are sticky, or tend to endure .
 This article begins from the constructivist premise that although events—from natural disaster to economic recession to military conflict --are unquestionably real, their social import is not determined by any of their objective features . The social import of these events is determined by the fact they are real .
 Whether an event is seen as a shocking crisis or manageable problem is endogenous to political contestation . Whether a crisis or a manageable problem can be seen as shocking or manageable, it is a problem .
 The prevailing image of substantial failure, including battlefield defeat, as a moment of intellectual awakening is apt when defeat is overwhelming and wars are extremely short. War is extremely short, and wars should be extremely short .
 Even major defeats normally come together only at the end of a protracted process in which actors seek to make sense of accumulating setbacks . But the collective perception of even major defeats usually comes together only .
 Few military contests have ended as decisively as World War II did for Germany and Japan . Even substantial battlefield defeats have permitted interpretations, such as the “stab in the back,” that have allowed interpretations .
 Short wars are more common than even scholars generally realize . Most wars provide ample opportunity while combat is raging for debate over their lessons .
 Diverse approaches figure crises as times of national unity beyond politics,48 but protracted conflicts are rife with disputes over the military’s stumbles, which, the logic of path dependence suggests, condition the scope and direction of subsequent change .
 As battlefield travails come to light, domestic political contestation centers on how to explain them . The U.S. House of Representatives will host a special session on Capitol Hill next week .
 Government spokespeople enjoy substantial starting advantages in the exercise of “interpretive leadership,”50 and because they own the military campaign, victory redounds to their benefit . Government spokespersons enjoy substantial advantages .
 Military setbacks erode public trust, diffuse authority, and empower the opposition . Opposition leaders’ rhetorical deployments are most crucial in this context . Military setbacks, however, erode .
 Opposition elites' rhetorical choices have profound narrative implications . Opposition elites’ rhetorical choices often have profound implications .
 Dominant narratives require continual reproduction, and because they are dominant narratives, they must continue to reproduce . The narratives of dominant narratives require constant reproduction .
 Realists and securitization theorists use crisis as a tool to deal with crises . Securitizing theorists use crises as a weapon of crisis, realists say . The stakes are so high in crisis, they say, and realists are realists .
 There is evidence that they often lie in the eye of the beholder . Though evidence that there is evidence of them lying in the eyes of the eye .
 Both sides permit criticism of the government, but when opposition elites opt for the former, they reinforce the dominant narrative . When they opt for a new path, they help undermine it, they also reinforce it .
 Activists and intellectuals are often progenitors of alternative narratives . They are of course not the only producers of culture, authorized to remake the boundaries of the legitimate . Activists are often the progenitor of alternative stories .
 The alternatives to the status quo are being sidelined until political elites take them up . But those alternatives remain sidelined until they are taken up by political elites .
 Whether elites publicly give voice to other narratives of national security depends on whether the alternatives are compatible with their established political identity and whether they see it as politically profitable .
 Opposition elites’ rhetorical choices are partly the product of a predictable political environment, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Opposition elites' rhetorical choices may be contingent, but they are partly a predictable environment .
 Early in a faltering war whose ultimate outcome is uncertain, all contestants, stylized here as doves and hawks, have incentives to ground their criticisms in national security narrative .
 As a result, national security narratives survive even substantial failures . National security narratives are strong enough to survive, even if they fail, experts say .
 This conclusion derives from a view of political action as both cultural and strategic . This conclusion is based on a view that political action should be seen as a matter of cultural importance .
 Doves and hawks operate within a common social environment with shared cultural toolkits they draw on to make public sense of events . "Doves and hawkks operate in a shared social environment," says the author .
 The U.S. government is seeking to further their political fortunes in Syria . But they are also strategic actors seeking to gain political advantage, they say .
 To put strategizing political elites at the center of the dynamics of a national security narrative is not to reduce dominant narratives to elite strategizing alone . The nation's national security narratives are not to be reduced to elite strategies alone .
 Whether elites can advance specific security narratives depends on more enduring structures of national identity discourse . Those narratives must be grounded in the nation's identity discourse, says Julian Zelizer .
 At any given nodal point, the range of legitimate rhetorical moves is limited, due to past elite rhetorical deployments, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "At any given point, there are limited options for rhetorical moves"
 National identity discourse is not national identity discourse, nor rhetorical consistency, nor strategic incentives . 51.5% of Americans voted for President Barack Obama in 2008 to win the White House .
 The following melding of strategic and cultural action draws on Swidler 1986 . The following is a melded-up version of the book by the same author .
 The politics of public rhetoric in Riker 1986 and 1996 is a more rationalist account of the politics of rhetoric in the 1980s and 1990s . Contrast this to a more purely rationalist view of the rhetoric of Riker in the '90s .
 I thus expect the following contingent generalizations often to hold, but there remains an irreducible element of choice, of agency . I therefore expect some of the following generalizations to hold .
 For instance, the persistence and effectiveness of the Sunni insurgency in Iraq created an opening for Democratic doves to take on the George W Bush administration .
 They could have exploited U.S. struggles in Iraq to confront the Terror narrative the Iraq invasion had been bound into . The Iraq invasion was bound into a Terror narrative . They could've exploited United States struggles .
 The Iraq War could have been a distraction from the “real” War on Terror, against al Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan . But they also could have criticized the Iraq War from safe narrative terrain .
 Democrats disappointed many supporters, but their choice was not surprising in light of the fog of war and the politics of military failure . When leading Democrats opted for the second course, they disappointed some supporters .
 When evidence of military difficulties has begun to accumulate but before the perception of irrevocable failure has crystallized, doves are reluctant to launch a thorough critique of the war’s underlying narrative .
 This is especially true early in a war, when its outcome is still seen as uncertain . Vocal criticism arguably can affect whether the war ends in victory or defeat, not just the inevitable conclusion .
 Should the war’s course reverse, critics’ judgment will be severely questioned . Critics may be held responsible, not lauded for their prescience, not prescience .
 Given the stakes, it is far safer for doves to criticize the war’s conduct, insist that the strategy is flawed, or propose withdrawal because of excessive cost or insufficient likelihood of victory . Doves should criticize the conduct of the war's conduct and insist on the strategy�
 As the war's costs mount, doves typically express themselves within the terms of the dominant narrative . As a result, even as the war’s costs mount the doves are more likely to express their views .
 Politics does not stop at war’s edge, at least not for long . War politics is normally waged within narrative bounds, but wartime politics is usually waged within bounds .
 These political dynamics, narrowing the scope of criticism in a campaign’s early stages, have long-term consequences . The political dynamics of a campaign's early stages are narrow, say experts .
 Once there is widespread agreement of defeat, there is no longer an option to recast the narrative basis of national security . Once that is reached beyond the tipping point of failure, it's no longer possible to do so .
 Their past utterances have established the conventions the public expects members of the ‘responsible opposition’ to adhere to . The public expects those in government and civil society to follow the same conventions .
 Those who move beyond those boundaries of legitimate critique, to embrace an 55-year-old woman, are 55 .
 Were doves to know in prospect what they know in retrospect, they might couple their wartime criticism to a revision of the nation’s security narrative .
 The politics of an uncertain and failing war cast narrative alternatives to the margins in war’s early stages . But the politics of a failing war casts narratives into the margins, where they remain .
 This mechanism of lock-in is at work not only when the political opposition’s leadership is stable, but even when military defeat shakes up the established order, it's at work . This mechanism is also at work when political opposition is stable and new personalities enter politics .
 Politicians and pundits alike are confined to the dominant narrative . Wishing to avoid the radical label, politicians and pundits have been confined .
 Even Barack Obama, who more than any other top Democrat made opposition to Iraq War the centerpiece of his political persona, remained in thrall to the Terror narrative .
 He joined other leading Democrats in criticizing the Iraq War as having obstructed the War on Terror properly conceived . The Iraq War has not been properly conceived, he said .
 The hawks seek to renew the mass public’s commitment, redouble the military's efforts, and offer the public a distinctive political stance . Criticizing the war's conduct and presenting themselves as true believers, hawks .
 Opposition hawks make political headway, albeit at the cost of principle, if their hawkish preferences are rooted in a different narrative of national security from that of the wartime government . The opposition hawks thus make political headway, though at the cost of principle .
 In contrast to opposition doves who seek to evade the perils of criticism, hawks are lured by the prospect of gain .
 In fact, the politics of military failure can work to consolidate narrative dominance, when hawks are enticed to sign on to a narrative they had previously refused to endorse, writes Andrew Hammond .
 The politics of military failure stifle change, but success on the battlefield and in coercive diplomacy opens space for departures from the dominant narrative . Success in the war and coercive diplomacy can open space for departure from dominant narrative, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Triumph alters opportunity structure facing those in both government and civil society who wish to narrate the world differently but previously felt politically constrained . But motive is only half the story, and triumph alters the opportunity structure .
 Success boosts the interpretive authority of both government spokespeople and their civil society allies, 56.5% of people in the U.S. are women . Success boosts government officials' authority, 56% of Americans say .
 It creates an opening for its owners to argue that the rules of the global game have changed because of the policy they advocated or implemented was so successful .
 Success is not, however, conducive to the consolidation of a new dominant narrative because it creates space for alternative futures without delegitimizing the past . Success is also not conducive to consolidating a dominant narrative, says the author .
 Even when doves seize the opportunity that success provides, the result is at most the erosion of narrative dominance . The erstwhile dominant narrative retains its legitimacy, and so does the doves seizing opportunity .
 This theoretical framework helps make sense of the peculiar dynamics of the Cold War narrative, says author .
 The U.S. abandoned its preferred narrative that denied the world’s tight interconnectedness . Worried about undercutting the war effort yet eager to strike political gains, they abandoned their preferred narrative .
 During the Cold War, superpower crisis is what passed for the battlefield, and the administration’s victory created an opening . Kennedy eagerly seized the opening, which he eagerly seized .
 The dominant Cold War narrative took shape through the marginalization of alternative narratives propounded by accommodationists and conservative nationalists . The Korean War and the Korean War were the focus of the Cold War .
 Accommodationists, such as former Vice President Henry Wallace, shared with Cold Warriors internationalist premises . But they differed in their representation of the adversary, their understanding of local conflicts .
 Accommodationists fell silent after the outbreak of war in Korea, which seemed to confirm a Moscow-driven communist agenda of aggression . It was the first time accommodationists had spoken out .
 The Korean War, however, need not have been fatal to the conservative nationalist narrative of national security, it was not .
 The North Korean invasion seemed to confirm their anticommunism, but it did not inherently undercut their skepticism of a global Cold War . North Korea invaded North Korea in 1950s, but did not necessarily undercut skepticism of the Cold War.
 The public’s frustration with the costly stalemate could have bolstered their challenge to Cold War premises, as Secretary of State Dean Acheson feared . In fact, the public's frustration would have bolstered the challenge .
 In human terms, the war was overall nearly as costly for the U.S. as the subsequent war in Vietnam . On an annualized basis, even more so. The war cost the United States even more than Vietnam's .
 The Korean War became deeply unpopular after Chinese forces crossed the Yalu River and a bloody deadlock set in . Republican politicians have repeatedly sought to exploit the public's frustration for political gain .
 There is good reason to think that the war’s course could, if not should, have led to the rejection of its legitimating Cold War logic and redounded to the conservative nationalist alternative . There is thus good reason for thinking that the course could have been reversed .
 Conservative nationalists, however, had only themselves to blame . Conservative nationalists dominated the congressional Republican leadership in the 1980s .
 As military setbacks in Korea accumulated, they did not invoke them as evidence of the folly of a militarized, US-led global crusade against communism . This would have accorded with their narrative of global politics and with their domestic priorities .
 Opposition hawks exploited military misfortune for political gain by exploiting military misfortune, writes CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Because the Korean War was much shorter than the Vietnam War, its annualized human cost was far greater . However, because the war was shorter than Vietnam, the human cost of the war is far greater.
 Taking the Truman administration to task for waging its global crusade inconsistently and ineptly, they shunted aside the nationalist alternative they held dear . The Truman administration was taken to task by the nationalists for waging a global crusade .
 Hoover challenged the liberal internationalist claim that the fabric of global politics was so tightly interwoven that security was indivisible . Hoover called on Americans “to preserve for the world this Western hemisphere Gibraltar of Western Civilization”
 Yet the Great Debate marked the last roar of conservative nationalism, which would soon be strangled by the politics of Korea . Yet the debate marked the final roar of conservatism, but it would soon die in Korea .
 In contrast to Hoover, younger leading conservatives readily sacrificed their nationalism on the altar of political expediency . Hoover's political time had passed, younger conservatives readily sacrifice their nationalism .
 Taft privately strategized just a month into the war that “the only way we can beat the Democrats is to go after them for their mistakes,” he said . Eager to score gains against an administration already on the ropes, Taft strategized that the only way
 Republicans spat out ‘Yalta’ as if the word itself were evidence of Democratic perfidy . This was hardly a new line of attack for Republicans, but it gave it renewed impetus and a new Asian twist .
 Unlike the party’s “China bloc,” the orthodox Republican Right of Taft, Wherry, and Speaker of the House Joseph Martin had previously shown as little interest in committing United States resources to East Asia as to Europe .
 After North Korea’s invasion, they discovered a long-lost love of Asia . They enthusiastically backed General Douglas MacArthur, who called for escalating the war to China . Truman cashiered MacArthur in April 1951 .
 Conservative Republicans could not follow MacArthur and preserve their opposition to the global Cold War . Conservative Republicans were forced to abandon the Cold War in the 1980s .
 MacArthur's chief problem with the administration’s policy was that it was not global enough . After all, for MacArthur, the chief problem was that the policy wasn't global enough, he says .
 If global security were divisible and if the battle against Communism were correspondingly selective, the administration’s lack of resolve in East Asia may not have been very consequential . Moreover, only by reproducing the logic of the global Cold War could hawks make their criticisms stick .
 For similar interpretations of the Republican Right, see Caridi 1968; and Kepley 1988 . For similar readings of the GOP right, see the 1968 and 1988 editions of this article .
 Downplaying the threat posed by global communism and portraying global security as divisible were clear signs that one was not serious and respectable . The nationalist alternative narrative was clear signs of one being not serious, respectable .
 By 1953 few conservatives elected to national office still publicly voiced reservations to Cold War globalism . Few conservatives elected in 1953 still voiced reservations .
 Eisenhower and Taft never disagreed “academically or theoretically” on principles, only on questions of application to and implementation in specific cases . Eisenhower noted in his diary with pleasant surprise that, when it came to foreign policy, he never disagreed with Taft .
 Conservatives need reminder of the boundaries of legitimation in the early 1950s . Progressives generally railed against the global Cold War and found themselves ignored, dismissed as “hick provincials” and renegade isolationists .
 Conservative intellectuals are also coming to terms with the new reality . Conservative intellectuals were also coming from behind the scenes .
 National Review led the effort to fuse Burkean conservatism and antistatist individualism under the banner of anticommunism . In the mid-1950s, the National Review tried to fuse the Burkean conservative and individualist .
 The Old Right’s maneuvering in the shadow of the Korean War paved the way for the rise of the globalist, interventionist New Right of Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan . The New Right's globalist interventionist policies paved the path for the New Right .
 So pilloried, they were a useful foil to Cold Warriors in both parties, both parties . They were pilloried for being anti-American .
 Taft’s ill-deserved reputation as a doctrinaire conservative would serve him well though in the wake of the Vietnam War . Taft would serve as a conservative in the post-Vietnam War era .
 Critics of the U.S. intervention in that Asian conflict would proclaim the much-maligned Taft a “sober, wise, and realistic voice” who had warned of the dangers of the Cold War . Taft was a ‘sober and wise voice�
 Taft's Cold War legacy is perhaps Taft’s most significant historical legacy . It is more than a little ironic that the Cold War consensus is his most significant legacy .
 This Cold War narrative’s dominance, however, lasted only about a decade . Cuba and the End of the Cold War Consensus was only a decade old .
 It was not defeat in Vietnam but triumph in Cuba that allowed liberal internationalists to drift from the Cold War narrative . The Cold War was not defeated in Vietnam, it was defeated in Cuba .
 Liberal activists and intellectuals had for years been poking holes in the Cold War narrative . Liberal activists have poked holes into Cold War narratives .
 Behind closed doors, some officials questioned key elements, including the zero-sum nature of superpower competition . Some officials, including Kennedy himself, questioned the idea .
 The major exception was the Sino-Soviet split, which experts and policy-makers publicly recognized by the early 1960s . They perceived centrifugal forces—“polycentrism” was the inelegant term— elsewhere in the communist world .
 In general, Times editorials on foreign affairs remained faithful to Cold War axioms . Kennedy administration’s public rhetoric continued to hew to the Cold War orthodoxy .
 The gap between the president’s private musings and his public rhetoric startled former Ambassador to the USSR Chip Bohlen . Bohlen: The president displayed a “mentality extraordinarily free from preconceived prejudices,” Bohlen said .
 Khrushchev “would like to prevent a nuclear war but is under severe pressure from his hard-line crowd,” he told Norman Cousins, editor of the Saturday Review . “I’ve got similar problems,’ he told Cousins, .
 The U.S. went to great lengths to keep secret its agreement to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey . The resolution of the crisis was a negotiated outcome in which the United States accommodated Soviet and Cuban concerns, the author says .
 The prevailing view at the time across the political spectrum was that Kennedy had scored a great victory, and journalists had difficulty exercising restraint . However, the prevailing view was that journalists were unable to exercise restraint .
 Kennedy had “made clear time and again” that violence was not a rational tool of policy in a nuclear-armed world . Khrushchev now agrees that violence is not an acceptable form of policy, he says .
 Khrushchev had suffered a “humiliating defeat” in Cuba that he would never live down . Kennedy deserved “the chief credit … the fateful decision to confront Soviet 88.” Kennedy, he wrote .
 The Times looked forward to the possibility of ending the Cold War . Under the shadow of mutual assured destruction, both superpowers now grasped .
 It opened political space for them to narrate the world in public, the way many had behind closed doors . The world of the world was opened up to them in public for the first time .
 "There was not a sentence in this speech with which would have privately disagreed in 1960," Beschloss says .
 Cold Warriors had previously grasped that mutual assured destruction gave the superpowers a common interest in avoiding direct confrontation . Although it amplified Americans’ fears of nuclear holocaust, Cold Warriors believed it was a good idea to avoid direct confrontation.
 Eisenhower administration’s embrace of ‘massive retaliation’ presumed that the Soviets would heed U.S. threats, if only in extremis . This premise underlay the Eisenhower administration's embrace of "massive retaliation" The Eisenhower administration assumed that the Soviet Union would heed American threats
 That the Soviets backed away from the brink in Cuba was consistent with Cold War expectations . It did not necessarily mean that they were open to genuine dialogue and a permanent settlement, says historian .
 That inference would have been reasonable if the Soviet Union had substantially changed its behavior after the crisis . But it would be reasonable if it had done so much to change its behavior since then .
 The crisis, conservatives argued, demonstrated the imprudence of deviating from the path of strength . Conservatives argued that the crisis was the result of a decision to take action .
 See also “Getting Back on Our Own Feet,” Chicago Tribune, 25 October 1962, 18. October 1962 .
 Conflicting interpretations regarding U.S. adversaries, superpower relations, and the magnitude of the threat were equally sustainable in the wake of the attack . The United States and the United States are at odds with each other .
 The battles over Vietnam at home took place on a narrative terrain that had already begun to fracture . The battles at home were fought over Vietnam's role in the Vietnam War .
 On the one hand, it offers a reinterpretation of an important historical case . On the other hand, the case offers a new perspective on history .
 The narrative of national security that historians refer to as the Cold War consensus became dominant later, and lost its dominant standing earlier, than conventional accounts suggest . It shows that national security narratives were dominant later and earlier than they are thought to have been .
 On the other hand, it also rethinks theoretically why and how major institutional and ideational change takes place .
 To make sense of the Cold War consensus, I advance a more deeply political theoretical account, says John Sutter . Sutter: The Cold War was a Cold War of Cold War . He says he advances a political theory to make sense .
 This article’s novel account of the Cold War consensus has implications for at least three enduring puzzles of U.S. policy . This article's novel account has implications to at least 3 enduring puzzles .
 The Cold War did not produce a garrison state . The U.S. State of the Cold War was a relatively small state in the United States .
 The Cold War brought about a broad and deep national-security state and militaryindustrial complex, despite antistatist traditions in the U.S. However, from another perspective, the puzzle is why the Cold War was brought about the deep national security state . The puzzle is how the
 The Old Right’s abandonment during the Korean War of the nationalist narrative opposing Cold War globalism provides part of the answer .
 See “Ike Counsels No Relaxing in Wake of Crisis,” Chicago Tribune, 30 October 1962, 11; and “Test Ban Treaty,’, 27 July 1963, N12 .
 Scholars now know that large-scale U.S. military intervention in Southeast Asia was not a direct result of Cold War groupthink . Third, concerning the Vietnam War, scholars now know .
 The indictment continued to resonate in the mid-1960s, with tragic consequences . But that indictment continues to resonate, with consequences .
 Whether my counterintuitive theoretical argument travels beyond the Cold War and beyond the U.S. remains a mystery .
 It is true that, unlike other nations, the United States, by virtue of its geographical position and the absence of peer competitors in its hemisphere, normally has been located far from the battlefield .
 Distance has not led Americans to look on the nation’s faraway wars with equanimity . These wars, even when limited in scope, have resonated powerfully in U.S. politics . But distance has led Americans not to look at the nation's faraway war with
 The political stakes of war are at least as great when the battle rages nearby, and wars on one's own territory can still be protracted, end indecisively, and be subject to multiple interpretations . War on one’s own territory is still a war that can still end indec
 Despite the unusual U.S. geopolitical position, there is little reason to think that its experiences with respect to national security narratives are unusual . The United States is not unique in its national security position .
 National security narratives should be more responsive to global realities and less subject to the logic of narrative politics . However, those factors should, if anything, have rendered national security narratives more responsive, more responsive .
 The ways in which the Cold War was an outlier make it an especially hard case, which should give greater credence to the theoretical claims . The Cold War is an especially difficult case, especially since it was a Cold War outlier .
 Political oppositions criticize military operations from the safe terrain of the dominant narrative . Although space constraints preclude much consideration of the argument’s crossnational applicability, it is common for political oppositions to criticize military .
 Everywhere the natives proved ungrateful for the graces of liberal empire, the natives were ungraced for the liberal empire . The natives proved to be ungratatific for the British Empire .
 "The imperial forces’ regular setbacks" typically led to questions about methods and means, rarely to fundamental challenges to the imperial enterprise and its civilizing mission . But their continual resistance, and the imperial forces' regular setbacks, often led to regular questions about method and means .
 The initial stages of the Yom Kippur War of October 1973 were so disastrous that it came to be known in Israel as the mehdal—the failure . Despite the subsequent operational triumphs, the war was called the "mehdal"
 Charges of complacency, arrogance, and poor judgment directed at the political and military leadership . But the intense demand for political accountability resulted in no fundamental rethinking of Israel’s strategic environment, strengthened the right and the rhetoric of siege .
 France’s floundering in Indochina and Algeria in the 1950s led to constitutional change, but opposition leader and then President. 106. President 106. France .
 The same dynamics were also at work in U.S. politics in the decade after 9/11, says CNN's John Sutter .
 George W Bush sold the Iraq War by binding it tightly into the War on Terror . The administration sold the war by binding the war to the war on terror . The Iraq War is now the focus of the Bush administration .
 One might have expected the Terror narrative to have met its end in the sands of Iraq, just like the U.S. military’s travails in Vietnam supposedly shattered the Cold War consensus . The Terror narrative was supposed to end in Iraq .
 Democratic opponents have jumped at the chance to articulate a different narrative of national security . One might have expected the administration’s Democratic opponents to jump at the opportunity .
 I have argued that although wartime setbacks shift narrative authority to the opposition, opposition doves are hesitant to break with the war’s underlying rationale . I've argued in this article, however, that despite wartime setbacks, the opposition is reluctant to change the narrative of the war .
 Leading Democrats left the underlying Terror narrative untouched in Iraq . Even as U.S. forces in Iraq faced an increasingly sophisticated and effective insurgency, the narrative was untouched .
 Leading Democrats did not launch a frontal assault on the War on Terror . Even as they stridently criticized a war they had once supported, they did not attack a war on terror .
 The Iraq War was a betrayal of the War on Terror properly conceived, in Afghanistan and Pakistan . Instead of Iraq War, they cast the Iraq War as a betrayal, they say . Instead, the war was fought in Afghanistan .
 They might have seized the opening the Iraq War provided to argue that terrorism was a concern, but no longer preeminent . 9/11 did not mark a fundamental change in global politics, they say .
 The Terror narrative maintained its dominant position for much of the decade, even though another mass-casualty attack on U.S. soil did not take place . Even though the public had soured on the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the public didn't want to see another mass
 The wartime politics of failure curbed the degree to the degree of Democrats confronted the Terror narrative . The war of terror was a major failure for Democrats in the post-war era .
 Their rhetorical choices amidst a failing war whose outcome remained uncertain were understandable . But they thereby missed an opportunity to alter the 107-year-old conflict .
 If Democrats complain that the War on Terror lasted too long, they partly have themselves to blame . The War is still with us, and in ways are still with them, they say .
 The Orientation of Newspaper Endorsements in U.S. Elections, 1940–2002 . Endorsement of newspapers in United States elections, 1940-2002 .
 A New History of U.S. National Security Policy Since World War II, edited by Andrew J Bacevich, vii–xiv. A New . History of United States National Security . Policy since WWII .
 Propaganda, Politics, and Public Opinion in the United States, 1950–1953 . The U.S. Public Opinion Project is based on a study of American public opinion .
 Domestic Politics, International Pressure, and the Allocation of American Cold War Military Spending, are key to the U.S. Cold War .
 The Iraq War and the loss of Republican Dominance in National Security are linked to the Iraq War . The war has been a major source of tension in the U.S. for decades .
 The Dynamics of Influence Among Media Opinion, the Public, and Politicians. CNN.com: "The dynamics of influence among media, the public, and politicians. Are you a good influence? Please share your thoughts with CNN iReport.com .
 Britain and Ireland, France and Algeria, Algeria, Israel and the West Bank-Gaza . Israel and Israel are the only countries in the Middle East region . Israel is the only Arab nation in the region .
 A Cultural Explanation of Sweden’s Intervention in the Thirty Years War . A Cultural explanation of Sweden's intervention in the 30 Years War. A Cultural Exact Explanation .
 The Politics of National Security from World War II to the War on Terrorism . The politics of national security from WWII to the war on terrorism. The Politics on National Security: The War on Terror.