 The Big Day 12th Anniversary of VIDUR's Blog will be March 29, 2021 . The big day is here. The anniversary will be the 12th anniversary of the blog .
 U.S. reconnaissance photograph of soviet missile sites on Cuba, taken from a Lockheed U-2 spy plane following the Cuban missile crisis . United States reconnaissance photograph taken from U.2 spy planes .
 CIA reference photo of Soviet medium-range ballistic missile in Red Square, Moscow . CIA reference photograph of Soviet missile in Soviet Union .
 Nikita Khrushchev proposed the idea of placing Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba to deter any future invasion attempt . The missiles would be placed to deter a future invasion of Cuba .
 During a meeting between Khrushchev and Raúl Castro that July, a secret agreement was reached . Construction of several missile sites began in the late summer .
 U.S. U-2 aircraft took several pictures of missile sites under construction . U.2 aircraft captured sites for medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles under construction.
 These images were processed and presented on October 15, which marks the beginning of the 13-day crisis from the U.S. perspective .
 Several Soviet ships attempted to run the blockade, increasing tensions . U.S. Navy ships were ordered to fire warning shots and then open fire on Soviet ships . The incident occurred during World War II .
 On 27 October a U-2 was shot down by a Soviet missile crew, according to Secretary of Defense McNamara’s later testimony . The action could have resulted in immediate retaliation from the Kennedy crisis cabinet .
 In the event itself, Kennedy stayed his hand and the negotiations continued .
 The Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for an U.S. public declaration and agreement never to invade Cuba . Publicly, the Soviets . would dismantle the weapons in . Cuba and give them to
 The United States agreed to dismantle all US-built Jupiter IRBMs deployed in Turkey and Italy . Secretly, the U.S. agreed that it would dismantle all of the US-made Jupiter missiles . The U.N. says it will dismantle the missiles in Turkey .
 Adlai Stevenson II shows aerial photos of Russian missiles in Cuba to the U.N. Security Council . USSR ambassador Valerian Zorin was also present at the meeting .
 May this auspicious festival usher in the spirit of love, brotherhood and harmony .
 Background journalism instead of court reporting is background journalism . Background journalism isn't just about court reporting. Background journalism is journalism . Klartext Translated .