 Contrary to popular belief, the Cuban missile crisis did not end with the agreement between the United States and Soviet Union .
 The 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis is less than a year away . Russian colleague Pasha Shilov and his Russian colleague came across several new accounts that changed our perspective on the crisis .
 Growing up in Berkshire, England, with Ronald Reagan's Cruise and Pershing missiles stationed 30 miles away from my family home, I was inculcated with a keen awareness of Cold War brinkmanship .
 Pasha grew up in Moscow and described how it was from the Soviet point of view equally frightening by his account . But what we've now learned about the events of October and November 1962 has put our own experiences into perspective .
 Svetlana Savranskaya, the director of the Russian archives, tells us an incredible story of the Soviet Submariners' Society in St. Petersburg .
 There had been a second secret missile crisis that continued until the end of November 1962 . The danger of a catastrophic nuclear war continued to be a constant threat .
 Khrushchev concluded that because the U.S. hadn't listed the missiles on their list of demands, the Soviet Union's interests would be well served by keeping them in Cuba . The missiles were never listed on the Americans' list, Khrushchchev concluded .
 Kremlin number two, Anastas Mikoyan, was charged with making the trip to Havana, principally to calm Castro down and make him what seemed like an offer .
 Mikoyan, whose wife was seriously ill, took the assignment knowing that the future of relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were on the line . The future of Cuba-Russia relations was at stake .
 Shortly after arriving in Cuba, Mikoyan received word that his wife had died, but despite this, he pledged to stay in Cuba and complete negotiations with Castro . Shortly after his wife's death, he received news that he was unable to leave Cuba .
 Mikoyan kept the detail of the missile transfer to himself . He witnessed mood swings and paranoia of Cuban leader convinced that Moscow had sold Cuba's defence .
 Castro objected to constant flights over Cuba by American surveillance aircraft . He ordered Cuban anti-aircraft gunners to fire on them . Mikoyan learned to his horror .
 U.S. forces around the world remained on Defcon 2, one short of global nuclear war until 20 November . The worst crisis since World War II was the worst since the war .
 He extricated Moscow from a seemingly intractable situation which risked blowing the entire crisis back up in the faces of Kennedy and Khrushchev . He then extricalled Moscow from an intractible situation .
 This story has illuminated a chapter in history that has been partially closed for the past 50 years . This is the first time the story has been told in the U.S. for 50 years.
 Jupiter W W.G.Ewald Defence Professionals/ DFI member of 2 Professional Joined Sep 28, 2011 Messages 14,139 Likes 8,587 Oct 19, 2012 .
 The president and Pentagon feared a surprise attack, and that's exactly what the missile rocketing toward Tampa appeared to be . President Obama and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton were among those who saw the missile launch .
 The report was false; controllers were using a software tape to simulate an attack at the same time that the radar, reconfigured to warn of missiles approaching the U.S. from the south, had detected an unidentified space object . The tape was being used to simulate a possible attack at
 As the non-attack of Oct. 31 shows, it was often enlisted men, pilots or low-ranking civilians who made tough calls . The non-assault was the first major U.S. attack since 9/11 .
 Now-declassified documents show the critical role that unsung low-ranking military and civilian participants played in averting disaster .
 Russia Ukraine War 2022 Love Charger . Failed Terrorist State of Pakistan: Idiotic Musings Butter Chicken .