 President James Monroe outlines the policy that becomes known as the Monroe Doctrine . The U.S. will use military force to prevent foreign powers from claiming new territory in the western hemisphere .
 The U.S. successfully tests the world’s first atomic weapon . July 16 – The United States successfully tested the first atomic bomb . The first atomic test took place July 16, 1918 .
 Leaders of the United States, Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union sign the Potsdam Agreement . The agreement divides defeated Germany and its capital city of Berlin into military occupation zones .
 Stalin places a military blockade around West Berlin to prevent people and supplies from reaching the Allied side of the city . The blockade was the result of a war between Russia and West Berlin .
 The Allies launch the Berlin Airlift, a year-long effort to deliver supplies to West Berlin by plane . West Berlin was devastated by the fall of World War II .
 The German Democratic Republic, or East Germany, was formed in the Soviet occupation zone . October 7 is the anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall . East Germany was formed during the Cold War .
 Fulgencio Batista launches a military coup and takes control of Cuba March 10, 1952 . Batista took control of the Cuban government March 10 .
 The Korean War ends when the two sides sign a cease-fire agreement reinstating the original borders of North and South Korea . The two sides end the Korean War when the war ends . North and North Korea is still at war footing .
 Julius and Ethel Rosenberg were executed for espionage after being convicted of providing nuclear secrets to the Soviet Union . Julius Rosenberg's wife and children were also executed for their role in espionage . The Rosenbergs were found guilty of espionage in the United States .
 Fidel Castro leads a group of revolutionaries in an attack on Cuban military facilities . Although he is captured and arrested, his passionate speeches make him a hero to many Cubans .
 The United States intervenes to prevent communist North Vietnam from taking over South Vietnam . The U.S. intervened to prevent the communist state taking over the South .
 The Red Scare dissipates when the United States Senate votes to censure Joseph McCarthy . McCarthy was censured by the U.S. Senate in 1950s .
 The Soviet Union and its allies form the Warsaw Pact for their mutual defense . The Warsaw Pact was formed for mutual defense in the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Khrushchev issues the famous threat “We will bury you” in a speech to Western diplomats . The threat was made in the famous speech to the Western diplomats in 1959 .
 Castro and his rebel followers return to Cuba and launch the Cuban Revolution . Castro's Cuban Revolution is the first of its kind in Cuba . Castro was killed by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower refuses to meet with Castro . April 15 – Castro visits the United States, but President Eisenhower refused to meet him . Castro visited the U.S. April 15 .
 The United States forges an agreement to place Jupiter missiles in Turkey . October 28 – The U.S. forges a deal with Turkey to place the missiles in the country .
 May 7 – The Soviet Union and Cuba establish diplomatic relations . May 7 is the date of the opening of diplomatic and trade relations between the two countries . Cuba and the Soviet Union established diplomatic relations in 1953 .
 Khrushchev denounces the United States and storms out of a summit meeting in Paris . May 16 – Khrushchen denounces U.S. and storms out of summit meeting .
 Castro denounces U.S. policy toward Latin America in a four-hour-long speech before the U.N. September 27 . Castro: "The United States has a very different relationship with Latin America" Castro: The U.K. should not have a relationship with the
 John F Kennedy is inaugurated as president of the United States. January 20 is the 20th anniversary of his inauguration .
 April 17 – The CIA-backed Bay of Pigs Invasion fails to unseat Castro’s government in Cuba . April 17 is the anniversary of the failed invasion of Cuba by the CIA in 1961 .
 June 4 – Kennedy and Khrushchev have their only face-to-face meeting at the Vienna Summit . June 4 is Kennedy and Krushchev’s only face to face meeting in Vienna, Russia .
 Soviet freighters secretly begin transporting nuclear missiles to Cuba in July . July 7, 1962, Soviet Union secretly began sending missiles to the island . July 9, 1962 – Soviet secret operation began in Cuba .
 CIA director receives reports of suspicious Soviet military shipments to Cuba . August 22 – CIA director John McCone receives reports that suspicious military shipments were made to Cuba from the Soviet Union . September 22, 1957, CIA director McCone received reports that Soviet military weapons were being sent to Cuba by the
 Kennedy warns Khrushchev that he will use military force if necessary to prevent the Soviets from placing offensive weapons in Cuba . Kennedy also threatens to use force to stop the Soviets putting offensive weapons on Cuba . The U.S. President says he will not allow the Soviets to place offensive weapons
 American U-2 spy planes capture photographic evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . October 14 – American spy planes captured photographic evidence in Cuba. October 14, 1962 . American U.2 planes captured Soviet missiles .
 United States ambassador Adlai Stevenson confronts Soviet ambassador Valerian Zorin at a meeting of the United Nations Security Council . U.S. Ambassador Stevenson confronted Soviet ambassador at the UN Security Council meeting .
 November 5 – Soviet freighters carry the disassembled missiles away from Cuba . November 5 - Soviet freighter carry the weapons away from the island . November 4 - Soviet military planes carry the missiles away .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev agree to establish a ‘hot line’ to speed communications between Washington, D.C., and Moscow . June – Kennedy and . Khrushchekchev establish a "hot line" to speed communication between Washington .
 August 5 – United States and Soviet officials negotiate the Limited Test Ban Treaty . August 5 is August 5 when the U.S. and Soviet Union negotiate the limited test ban Treaty . The treaty was signed by the United States, Russia and China .
 Warsaw Pact forces invade Czechoslovakia to install a pro-Soviet government . Czechsoslovakia was ruled by the Warsaw Pact in the early 1960s .
 U.S. involvement in Vietnam War peaks at more than five hundred thousand American combat troops . United States military involvement in the Vietnam War peaked at over 5 hundred thousand U.K. troops .
 Republican candidate Richard M Nixon wins the presidency by promising to end the Vietnam War . Republican candidate Nixon promises to end Vietnam War in 1968 .
 The Moscow Summit results in the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty . The treaty was signed by Russia and the U.S. in 1994 .
 August 1 – Ford and Brezhnev sign the Helsinki Accords . Accords were intended to reduce tensions and promote peace between NATO and Warsaw Pact countries . August 1 was Ford's first visit to Russia .
 Castro angers the U.S. by sending Cuban troops to support communist forces in Angola . November 7 – Castro sends Cuban troops in support of the communist government .
 Castro is elected leader of the Non-Aligned Movement . The group is a group of nations not formally aligned with either of the Cold War superpowers . Castro was elected leader .
 President Ronald Reagan adopts an aggressive stance in U.S.-Soviet relations . Reagan takes office and adopts a tougher stance in 1981 .
 Reagan and Gorbachev sign the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces Treaty . The treaty eliminates an entire category of nuclear weapons from the superpowers’ arsenals .
 Gorbachev declares that the Soviet Union will no longer intervene to protect communist regimes . The Soviet Union no longer intervenes in the fight against communist regimes. Gorbama declares that he will not intervene .
 Poland installs the first non-communist government in Eastern Europe . Poland holds free elections and installs the government . Poland is the first country to install a non-Communist government .
 The fall of the Berlin Wall signals the end of communism in Germany . November 9 is the date of the fall of communism .
 Hard-line communists stage a coup that temporarily removes Gorbachev from power in the Soviet Union . The coup took place in August 1985, when Gorbama was ousted from power . The Soviet Union was ruled by hard-line communist groups .
 Gorbachev resigns and the Soviet Union dissolves into twelve independent republics . December 25 is the day when the USSR dissolves as a result of the collapse of the USSR .
 Boris Yeltsin becomes president of the newly formed Russian Federation . Yeltsins is the first Russian president to hold office in Moscow . Boris was assassinated in 1992 .
 Fidel Castro steps down as leader of Cuba after forty-eight years . He is succeeded by his younger brother Raul Castro . Fidel Castro has been in Cuba for more than 40 years .
 U.S. president Barack Obama is photographed shaking hands with Cuban president Raul Castro . Obama and Castro shook hands together in Havana .
 Russia sends military forces to Ukraine and annexes the disputed region of Crimea . Russia annexes Crimea, annexes disputed Crimea .
 The United States and Cuba reach an agreement to resume normal diplomatic relations . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for more than a decade .