 Albert ""Bud"" Wheelon played an important but often overlooked, behind-the-scenes role in helping to mitigate the crisis . Wheelon's role was often overlooked by the public, but he was key to mitigating the disaster .
 Wheelon was a whiz-kid physicist from California who finished his PhD from MIT in 1952 at the young age of 23 . Wheelon completed his PhD at MIT at the age of just 23 in 1952 .
 After graduating, he briefly took a job at Douglas Aircraft Company before starting a nine year stint at a technology firm in Los Angeles called Ramo-Wooldridge which had just started collaborating with the Air Force to develop a workable ballistic missile .
 The company would ultimately produce designs that would become Atlas, Titan and Thor rockets . Some of the rockets are still used for spaceflight today .
 Wheelon traveled to Washington to train CIA analysts at the National Photographic Interpretation Center how to look for missiles in spy plane photographs . Wheelon trained CIA analysts how to find missiles in photos .
 Through the end of the 50s and into the 60s, he kept his day job at Ramo-Wooldridge helping develop the Minuteman missile's guidance system . He also helped the CIA analyze photos and decipher intercepted Soviet radar signals .
 In early 1962, Wheelon had worked his way up to being the director of TRW's radio physics lab . The CIA asked him to join their Office of Scientific Intelligence, full-time .
 At the same time, trouble was brewing 90 miles off the coast of Florida . The U.S. was in the midst of a deadly storm .
 Cuba's new socialist government led by Fidel Castro worked out a deal with the Soviet Union to install nuclear missiles on the island pointed at the U.S. The missiles were installed in Cuba's hands of Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 U.S. U-2 spy planes first spotted the launch sites on October 15 . It set in motion a diplomatic showdown between the United States and the Soviet Union that could have ended in a nuclear war .
 Even before any U-2s photographed a single missile, Wheelon had already grown convinced that the Soviets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. Air Force had never photographed a missile .
 Intelligence reports from sources all over Cuba describe mysterious long, thin shipping containers driven through small rural towns in the dark of night .
 He raised the possibility with the intelligence committee he was chair of, the Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Group, but no one else bought his argument .
 Just days before missiles were discovered in Cuba, the committee published a report saying it wouldn't happen . Ultimately just days before the discovery, the report was published by the committee .
 Wheelon found out later that the CIA director of the CIA himself, John McCone, also thought the Soviets were putting missiles in Cuba before the U-2s found them .
 Wheelon's Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Group took center stage at the CIA during the crisis . Once the missiles were discovered, Wheelon took over control of the CIA .
 National Photographic Interpretation Center supplied president with updated statuses of missiles every morning . They teamed up with the National Photographics Center, to supply the president with updates .
 His years of working on missile designs and interpreting Soviet missile capabilities for the CIA had made him the ideal person to chair the committee .
 Every morning a new ""Joint Evaluation on the Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba"" made its way into the Oval Office with grim news about which missile were operational and what they could do .
 After nearly two weeks of tense diplomatic action, the Soviets agreed to remove their missiles, ending the crisis . The CIA says the missiles were removed from the Soviet Union .
 Wheelon was McCone's first pick to head the agency's fledgling science and technology division . Not too long after, in June of 1963, the Deputy Director for Research resigned, and Wheelon resigned . Wheelon became the first person to become the Director of Research at the U.
 Wheelon expanded its reach and capabilities over the next three years . At the time, the division was small, but over the years it was expanding its reach . Wheelon was founded in 1973 .
 Wheelon had to deal with an ongoing fight between the Defense Department and the CIA over who would be in charge of satellite reconnaissance . Wheelon: The first thing that Wheelon faced was an ongoing battle between the CIA and the Pentagon .
 Since 1960, the CIA had been running its successful CORONA program, a spy satellite that would fly over the Soviet Union and photograph huge swaths of previously hidden territory . The program was first run by the CIA in 1960 .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara had been trying to bring all satellite reconnaissance programs under control of the National Reconnaissance Office .
 McCone had let the NRO's inception in 1961, one that McCone let fester for a long while . It was fight that had been going on since 1961 . The NRO was founded by McCone and McCone .
 He had come under a lot of pressure to bring all CORNOA operations under the NRO . He had started to turn over control of the operations .
 Wheelon thought it was important for the CIA to stay involved in the nation's spy satellite program and put his foot down . Wheelon: "It was important to keep the CIA in the forefront of the program"
 McCone convinced McCone that the country needed two agencies developing spy satellites in order to encourage competition against each other and strive to be the best . He convinced him that the two agencies needed each other .
 Atomic Energy Commission established Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to compete with struggling Los Alamos . McCone signed off on the action as head of the AEC at the time .
 McCone decided to fight the DoD and the NRO and keep the CIA in the satellite development game . McCone: "I'm not going to let the CIA do what it wants to do. I'm going to do it"
 The technological limits of the early 1960s made spy satellite systems slow and unwieldily . Spy satellite systems were slow, unwieldy and cumbersome . The technology limits were the limits of spy satellites .
 They still needed to take photos on physical film and return that exposed film back to Earth for processing and analysis . The team needed to return the exposed film to the Earth for analysis .
 A plane would have to snag each photo bucket in mid air as it fell to Earth . The technology had such a slow turnaround, there were no useful satellite photos from Cuba during the crisis .
 By keeping the development of new satellite technology in the CIA, Wheelon was able to guide the direction of the technology . Wheelon: "I'm glad to have the ability to keep the CIA in charge of satellite technology"
 The image tubes that TV cameras of the day used were too fragile and low resolution to use in orbit . They were used by AT&T's Bell Labs in the 1950s . The new technology was developed in the 1960s .
 Charge-coupled devices, or CCDs, showed immense potential as electronic image sensors . At the time, the technology was still in its infancy .
 Wheelon directs agency funds to support the lab's work on CCDs . Wheelon started directing agency funds for the research .
 Wheelon left the CIA for the Hughes Aircraft Company in 1966, but his legacy continued as the CIA continued to support Bell Labs's CCD cameras . Wheelon's legacy continued through the CIA .
 In 1976 the KH-11 KENNEN spy satellite was launched carrying the first electronic eye into orbit . It was launched in 1976 carrying an electronic eye in orbit .
 It revolutionized the way we looked at Earth which revolutionized how we look at the rest of the universe . The discovery of the first black hole in the Earth revolutionized Earth's view of the world .
 The Hubble Space Telescope is almost certainly a modified version of the basic KH-11 design . It's almost certainly the same design as the original KH-10 .
 No official photos of the KH-11 satellites have been released, but it's widely believed to bear more than a passing resemblance to the Hubble . A long tube and curved mirror at its base to focus incoming light onto a camera .
 When NASA was first designing the space telescope, they had originally planned on a mirror three meters across, but opted instead for one that 2.m. across to take advantage of mirror building machines built for spy satellites . The Hubble Space Telescope's mirror is 2.2 meters across .
 In 2012, the NRO donated the optics assemblies of two unused spy satellite to NASA . The optics assemblies are thought to be the guts of old KH-11 satellites that never flew .
 Our science teacher claims that the pain comes from a small electrical shock, but we believe that this is due to the absorption of light .
 Physics@Home recipe for homemade ice cream . Easy to make ice cream recipe . Easy recipe .