 With your partner, discuss the option choice with regard to advantages and disadvantages . Discuss the options and the advantages of each choice .
 One of our U-2 flights over Cuba has revealed what analysts believe to be nuclear missiles . Analysts believe the missiles could be nuclear weapons .
 Cuba remained Communist & heavily armed Both leaders didn’u2019t lose face and came away with concessions Helped renew the thaw .
 Extension task: Write two press releases . Explain your answer to the question . Explain the answer . Write a press release explaining your answer. Explain the question.
 Choose either to produce a short press release explaining the background, key events & outcome for the Soviet news agency . Or write an American version of events for the White House spokesman's speech to journalists .
 Fidel Castro overthrows Battista in 1959, establishing Communist government . United States ally, United States businesses &amp; United States military base 1959 . U.S. military base in Cuba .
 1,400 anti-Cuban exiles attempted to overthrow Castro in 1961 . April, 1961, Bay of Pigs was an attempt to overthrow the Cuban government .
 Autumn 1962, Cuba has received 1000s of USSR missiles, jets, boats &amp; personnel . Cuba has since received 1,000s of Soviet missiles and jets . The Cuban government was in full control of the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev wanted to force JFK into bargaining over U.S. missile in Europe in Europe, says JFK . JFK wanted to negotiate over United States missile with Soviet Union in Europe . JFK was assassinated in September 1968 .
 Sites nearing completion, experts believe they could be ready in 7 days . Sites are expected to be ready for the first time in seven days, experts say .
 Aggression imminent\/imperialists disregarding world opinion \u2014Clearly not the case. Aggressive .imperialistists disregard world opinion .
 Kennedy receives letter offering to negotiate over missiles in Cuba with removal of blockade and U.S. invasion threat . October, Kennedy receives another letter offering a deal with Cuba . October 9, 1959, Kennedy received letter offering negotiations over missiles . October 10, 1959 - Kennedy receives a letter offering
 The Kennedys thought the President could be impeached if he didn’t act in accordance with his prior warnings . Could we then rely solely on diplomacy?
 Determined in first 48 hours of crisis that the removal of missiles was the primary objective . Determined to remove missiles was primary objective of removing missiles .
 Kennedy decides to ignore second letter, but accepts terms of 1st letter . Kennedy decided to ignore letter, accept terms of first letter .
 1959: Fidel Castro came in to power in Cuba . 1959: The United States did not trust Castro and planned to overthrow him . 1962: The World on the Brink was on the brink of war .