 Cuban Revolutionary Leader Fidel Castro, 1926-2016 . RFE/RL journalists report the news in 27 languages in 23 countries where a free press is banned .
 Castro served as prime minister or president of the Caribbean island state for nearly 50 years . A revolutionary icon, Castro was a revolutionary icon of the island state . Castro is a former leader of Cuba .
 He survived a U.S.-backed military invasion, ten United States presidents, United States economic sanctions, diplomatic isolation, the demise of his chief Soviet sponsor, and played a central role in bringing the world to nuclear war .
 Cuban Revolutionary Leader Fidel Castro, 1926-2016, died November 26, 2016 . Cuban revolutionary leader Fidel Castro was Cuban President of Cuba .
 Fidel Castro, the man who led Cuba for nearly a half century has died at the age of 90, his brother, President Raul Castro, announced on national television . Fidel Castro was the Cuban Revolutionary Leader, 1926-2016 . He led the Cuban government for nearly 50 years .
 The former revolutionary leader will be cremated on November 26 in accordance with his wishes, Castro said . Castro will be buried in Castro's home in Castro-era home .
 Fidel Alejandro Castro Ruz was born on August 13, 1926 . He was the son of wealthy, Spanish-born landowners . Fidel was born in 1926 .
 Castro said he was shocked by the stark contrast between his family’s wealth and the poverty of those around them . Their austerity may have influenced Castro, he said .
 Castro in the early 1950s began organizing a militia in a bid to oust pro-American President Fulgenico Batista . Embracing Marxism-Leninism after law school in Havana, Castro began organizing militia in the 1950s .
 Havana was at the time a playground for America's rich - famous for its nightlife and music . Under Batista's regime, Havana was known for its corruption and brutality . Havana is now a tourist hotspot .
 Castro's forces finally ousted Batista, storming into Havana to the cheers of thousands of supporters . After failing six years previously in a bid to spark a popular revolt, the Castro forces stormed into Havana .
 Just 30 days after entering Havana, Castro embarked on a victory tour of the U.S. Castro's Cuba tour was just 30 days old . Castro visited the United States 30 days before entering Havana .
 Castro portrayed himself as a humble man without ambition . Castro's visit to the U.S. would be his last to the United States .
 Little did anyone know that he would go on to lead his nation for nearly half a century . He went on to become a president of the United States .
 Cuba-U.S. relations between Havana and Washington soured in the year following the revolution . The Cuban Revolution was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1991 .
 First, the United States suspended sugar imports after Havana nationalized a U.S.-owned oil refinery . The United States also banned sugar imports from Cuba after the oil refinery was nationalized .
 Washington began a partial economic embargo of Cuba, followed by a severing of diplomatic ties . The U.S. severed diplomatic ties with Cuba last year .
 Castro's forces soundly defeated a U.S.-backed invasion by Cuban exiles in the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 . Fortified by deepening political and economic ties with Moscow, Cuban forces defeated the invasion in 1961 .
 The events of October 1962 -the so-called Cuban missile crisis -that would shake the world . The events occurred in October 1962 .
 U.S. Ambassador Adlai Stevenson demanded to know if Moscow was deploying nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba that could hit United States cities . Stevenson: "Moscow is deploying nuclear weapons that could be hit by U.N. cities"
 Russian missiles have been deployed on the Caribbean island, says Stevenson . Zorin refused to reply, much to Stevenson's chagrin, but missiles were deployed .
 The world has perhaps never been closer to a nuclear confrontation . Taped records of conversations involving U.S. President John F Kennedy show that the world is perhaps never closer to an nuclear confrontation.
 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev relented after a U.S. naval blockade of Cuba . The blockade was eventually lifted after a United States naval blockade . The U.N. embargo was imposed on Cuba in 1959 .
 Castro went on to attain iconic status in Latin America . Cuba's excellent medical system, 98 percent literacy rate, and low infant mortality were the region's best . Cuban medical system was the best in the region .
 At its demise in 1991, the Soviet Union was giving Havana some $6 billion a year in aid . Yet progress came at a price, often paid for by Soviet Union, which at its demise gave Havana $6 a year .
 Tens of thousands of Cubans sought to reach the United States aboard makeshift boats . With that money cut off, the country still under an intense economic blockade, tens of thousands sought to get there .
 Castro’s regime was regularly criticized by human rights groups and Western governments for persecuting dissidents and jailing them without trial . Over the years, Castro's regime was also regularly criticized for persecution of dissidents .
 Fidel Castro, the man who led Cuba for nearly five decades, has died at the age of 90 . Fidel Castro: A Life In Pictures by RFE/RL . Castro: Fidel Castro's life in Cuba is over .
 Castro served as prime minister or president of the Caribbean island state for nearly 50 years . He swept to power in a communist uprising in 1959 . Castro has been president or prime minister of Cuba since 1959 .
 With the collapse of the U.S.R.R., Cuba was fighting for survival . Castro acknowledged in a 1992 speech that the country was being asked again for an extraordinary international mission .
 Raul Castro was unanimously chosen as president by Cuba’s National Assembly in February, 2008 . Castro's younger brother, Raul, has been in the hands of the Castro family for years .
 Fidel Castro’s younger brother by four years, Raul had been acting president since 2006, when Fidel underwent intestinal surgery . Fidel Castro's younger brother had been in charge of the government since 2006 .
 Like Fidel, he was a revolutionary, serving as a rebel commander in the 1950s . He was a member of the Cuban revolutionary movement . Fidel Castro was a leader of the revolution in Cuba .
 After his brother became president, Raul rose to prominence in the regime . He rose to fame in the 1980s and 1990s .
 As president, he has introduced economic reforms in the area of consumer choices, wages, and food production .
 In December 2014, Raul Castro agreed to reestablish diplomatic ties and end decades of hostility with the U.S. The Castro-U.S.-Cuban relations between the two countries ended in December .
 Castro lived long enough to see U.S. President Barack Obama visit Cuba earlier this year . It was the first trip by a United States president in 88 years to Cuba . Castro was Cuban president of Cuba for 88 years .
 U.S. President Barack Obama met with Cubans in Cuba on Thursday . Obama has been criticized for his comments on Cuba .
 Former RFE/RL correspondent Jeffrey Donovan wrote the original version of this article .
 RFE/RL journalists report the news in 27 languages in 23 countries where a free press is banned by the government or not fully established . The news comes in the country where the government does not fully establish the free press .