 The U.S. had “contributed to the retention of power by the traditional oligarchy” and “destroyed” a Brazilian program to modernize the political structure of the Northeast . The United States had ‘contributed’ to the . retention of
 Its “laudable social goals” encouraged political instability, but their achievement demanded an 80 percent private investment . Its achievement demanded a private investment “which cannot be attracted amid political instability.”
 That the Alliance for Progress was a Cold War policy was never a subject of dispute . It was never an issue of dispute over whether the policy was Cold War .
 Kennedy believed that the key to stability and anti-communism was democracy, economic growth and development, and social change . Kennedy's Latin American policy was the belief that democracy and economic growth were key to the success of his policy .
 Through recognition policy, internal security initiatives, and military and economic aid programs, the Administration bolstered regimes and groups that were undemocratic, conservative and frequently repressive .
 The short-term security that anti-Communist elites could provide was purchased at the expense of long-term political and social democracy, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer says the anti-communist elites bought the short term security that they could provide at the cost of social democracy .
 The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro . “My God,” muttered Richard Helms of the Central Intelligence Agency .
 President Kennedy spent as much or more time on Cuba as on any other foreign policy problem . Kennedy spent more time in Cuba than any other major foreign policy issue .
 Cuba stood at the center of his Administration’s admitted greatest failure, the Bay of Pigs, and its alleged greatest success, the missile crisis . Cuba was the site of the President's admitted failure, and his alleged success .
 Looking back at the early 1960s, he wondered if we did not pay a very great price for being more energetic than wise about a lot of things, especially Cuba . Looking back, he wonders if we paid a very high price .
 Castro dared m W tr0 because he’d had the effrontery to thumb his nose at us,” recalled lj '* one American diplomat . ‘They always wanted to get moving on Cuba,’ said one diplomat .
 Some Europeans thought that “we kept slapping at Castro because he’d had the effrontery to thumb his nose at us,” recalled I X'wUa' 0ne America n diplomat . The popular, intelligent, but erratic Cuban * J, li •
 Cuban leader Batista came down from the Sierra I h Mount ains in January 1959 to overthrow Fulgencio Batista . Batista was a popular, intelligent, but erratic Cuban I 1 u /ufoUU’/ttc i ea < fer .
 Kennedy harbored a “deep feeling against Castro,” and the Cuban thought the American “an intelligent and able leader of American imperialism” Castro branded him a new Hitler after the Bay of Pigs invasion . Castro thought Kennedy was “intelligent and able”
 Kenned y had initially joined many Americans in welcoming the Cu^ v ba n Revolution as a decided advancement over the ‘oppressive” BaV lib’l $ tista dictatorship .
 Kennedy had a “patient attitude” toward the new government, which he did/J 1 y\ ' ' W/not see as Communist . Linking Castro to the legacy of Bolivar, Kennedy said .
 I Yankeeism, postponement of elections, jailing of critics, and national-^ ization of property, is a form of national-ism .
 The President rejected the idea that intense U.S. hostility to the Cuban Revolution may have contributed to Castro’s tightening political grip and flirtation with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy and other Americans did not wish to acknowledge the measurable benefits of the revolution . The island’s infamous corruption that once had been the American Mafia's domain was eliminated . Kennedy and others did not acknowledge the tangible benefits .
 Kennedy officials concluded that Cuba’s was a “betrayed revolution” instead of a ‘betrayal revolution’ Instead of a revolution, they concluded that it was a betrayal .
 As Cuban-American relations deteriorated, Cuban-Soviet relations gradually improved . Cuban-U.S. relations with Soviet Union gradually improved in the 1960s .
 Americans grew alarmed that Castro sneered at the Monroe Doctrine by inviting the Soviet military to the island . Americans believed that a once-loyal ally had jilted them for the tawdry embrace of the Soviets .
 Castro declared himself Marxist-Leninist in late 1961 . Americans who had long denounced him as a Communist then felt vindicated . Castro was a Communist in 1961 .
 U.S. leaders began to speak of Cuban membership in the ‘Sino-Soviet bloc,” thus providing Communists with a “spearhead” to penetrate the Western Hemisphere . The Cuban Communist Party was given a ‘spearheading’ to penetrate
 Castro's revolutionary mission coincided with Khrushchev's alarming statement that the Soviet Union supported wars of national liberation worldwide . Castro’s revolutionary mission happened to coincide with Nikita Khrushche's alarming statements .
 The Soviets insisted on utilizing Communist parties within political systems, whereas the Cubans espoused peoples’ rebellions . It mattered little to Americans that Havana and Moscow differed markedly over the best method for promoting revolutionary change .
 Cuba became a “target for our national frustration and annoyance with Moscow and the whole Communist conspiracy," a senator says . Cuba came to represent the Cold War in the United States’s backyard, the senator said .
 In addition to the Kennedy style and the Cold War, American politics influenced the Administration’s Cuba policy .
 Kennedy seized the Cuban issue to counter Richard Nixon’s charge that the inexperienced Democratic candidate would abandon Quemoy and Matsu to Communism and prove no match for the hard-nosed Khrushchev .
 President Eisenhower had initiated a clandestine CIA program to recruit Cuban exiles for an invasion of the island . Candidate Kennedy was unaware of the program . After exploiting the Cuban issue, Kennedy could not easily have retreated .
 Hardly a press confer• r , , v .. ence went b y without an insistent question about Cuba . Hardly any press conference was held without a single question .
 Republicans and Democrats alike peppered the White House with demands for action against Castroism . Castroism has been a problem for the Obama administration .
 The Cuban exile commu-V'C^ n ‘ ty ty * n ^ or ^ da never let the issue rest . The vocal, burgeoning Cuban exile never let it rest .
 Businessmen protested that the Cuban government nationalized American-owned property worth a billion dollars . Businessmen grew apprehensive that the practice would become attractive in the hemisphere .
 George Meany, the head of the AFLCIO, decries the communization of the Cuban labor federation . Meany: "I'm not sure what's going on here, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 Everyone seemed eager to know when Kennedy would knock Castro off his perch, and many expected the President to act before the next election . The President is expected to act on Castro's behalf .
 The strong currents of decolonization, anti-imperialism, revolutionary nationalism, and social revolution, sometimes in combination, undermined the instru* Urk l P % n. n)[t ^ > luba , 1*7 ments the imperial nations had used to maintain
 In the 1950s France was driven from Indochina, and Great Britain’s position in the Middle East receded dramatically after the Suez crisis, to cite two prominent examples . Great Britain's position in Middle East has also receded after Suez .
 The Cuban Revolution exemplified this process of breaking up'and breaking away,' says President Obama . "The Cuban Revolution" exemplified the process of "breaking up"
 American leaders reacted so hostilely to this revolution not simply because Castro and his 26th of July Movement taunted them or because domestic politics and the Cold War swayed them, but because Cuba, as symbol and reality, challenged the United States .
 Cuba sought independence and radical social change which would necessarily come at the expense of the United States . The latter, not unexpectedly, defended its interests against revolutionary nationalism . The U.S. was not surprised by the outcome .
 U.S. helped expel Spain from Cuba in 1898 and imposed the Platt Amendment on the island in 1903 . Americans gained influence through military interventions, occupations, threats, economic penetration, and political manipulation .
 The United States also stationed a military mission in Cuba and sent arms to Batista’s forces . The U.S. also stationed military missions in Cuba during the Batista regime .
 CIA infiltrated political groups and helped Batista organize an anti-Communist police unit . Batista organized the anti-communist police force . The CIA infiltrated groups and organized political groups, Batista said .
 Eisenhower Administration tried to manipulate Cuba once again on the eve of Castro’s victory . The Eisenhower Administration had underestimated the depth of the Cuban unrest . After having underestimated the 26th of July Movement, the Eisenhower administration tried again .
 With the President’s blessing and CIA instructions, William D Pawley, owner of Cuban lands and former Ambassador to Brazil, traveled to Havana to press Batista to resign in favor of a military junta in order to prevent the 26th of July Movement .
 The Cuban President balked at this exercise of “Plattism,” and Pawley’s mission aborted . Pawley's mission aborted. Pawley: “I’m going to try to get the Cuban President to sign a deal with the U.
 In 1959-1960, Ambassador Philip Bonsai thought that Castro suffered “mental unbalance at times” and Eisenhower concluded that the Cuban leader “begins to look like a madman” Havana and Washington traded punch for punch .
 In November 1959 the President decided to encourage anti-Castro groups within Cuba to “check” or “replace” the revolutionary regime, and thus end an antiAmericanism that was “having serious adverse effects on the United States position in Latin America and corresponding advantages
 The CIA, as well, hatched assassination plots against Castro and staged hit-and-run attacks along the Cuban coast . The CIA also hatched assassinations against Castro .
 The U.S. suspended Cuba’s sugar quota and forbade American exports to the island, drastically cutting a once-flourishing commerce . Cuba undertook land reform that struck at American interests and nationalized Cuba I29 y Q /[\ ) ^ C .
 Castro demanded that the embassy staff be reduced to the small size of the Cuban delegation in Washington . On January 3, 1961, fearing an invasion and certain that the American embassy was a “nest of spies” in Cuba .
 Eisenhower failed to topple Castro, but U.S. pressure accelerated the radicalization of the revolution . American pressure accelerated Castro's radicalization and helped open the door to the Soviets .
 Moscow bought sugar, supplied technicians, armed militia, and offered generous trade terms . Moscow also supplied technicians and armed militia members .
 Althoug h the re volution’s radicalization was probably inevitable, ^Uwas^not inexorable that Cuba would end up in the Soviet camp . Although h the . re volve’“radicalization” of the Cuban government was probably
 Kennedy greatly exaggerated the Cuban threat, attributing to Castro a capability to export revolution that the Cuban leader never had . Kennedy lavished Castro with attention he did not deserve, lavishing on him .
 Castro was “an affront to our pride” and a “mischief maker,” Walter Lippmann wisely wrote . But he was not a ‘mortal threat” to the United States, he says . Castro was not “a mortal
 He helped generate major crises, including the October 1962 missile crisis . He also helped generate crises, such as the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, in Cuba .
 The new President actually made his first important policy choice on Cuba before he entered the White House .
 Secretary of StateChn§ telephoned Secretary-designate Dean Rusk and reaction . Secretary-of-state chn§ called Rusk on the day Cubaiv, U.S. relations were severed .
 The United ’States lost an embassy which had served as a first-hand listening post . Now Washington would have to rely upon a fast diminishing number of CIA informants and deep-cover agents .
 An invasion by Cuban exiles is one of the few means left to resolve the contest with Cuba . Most important, with economic coercion having failed to bring down Castro, diplomacy has failed to work .
 The questions of whether and under what conditions to approve an exile expedition to Cuba dominated the President’s discussion of Cuba in his first few months in office .
 National security adviser McGeorge Bundy later said that the President “really was looking for ways to make it work ... and allowed himself to be persuaded it would work and the risks were acceptable .
 He listened to but rejected the counsel of doubting advisers, and never revealed moral or legal qualms about violently overthrowing a sovereign government . He listened but rejected advice from doubters, and he never revealed legal or moral qualms .
 President worried most about which methods would deliver success and whether the guiding hand of the U.S. could be concealed, aides say .
 Kennedy sought deniability of an American role, but never the demise of the project . Kennedy wanted deniability from the project, but it was never the end of it .
 On March 11, Kennedy’s chief advisers gathered in a critical National Security Council meeting . The meeting was a critical meeting for Kennedy's top advisers .
 CIA Director Allen Dulles and Deputy Director for Plans Richard Bissell explained plans for an invasion at the town of Trinidad, on Cuba’s southern coast near the Escambray Mountains, where CIA-backed rebels were already operating .
 The President criticized the plan as too much like a spectacular World War II amphibious landing . The plan was criticized by the President for being like WW II .
 He asked for something quieter, / and he instructed planners that no American forces were to be used . No American forces would be used, he said .
 Great embarrassment would beset Washington if the exile brigade were to disband and its members return to the United States to bellow their anger .
 Kennedy set April 17 as D-Day as the date of Operation Zapata . Kennedy set the date after Dulles' assurance that the prospects for the operation were even greater than they had been for the successful CIA plot in 1954 .
 On April 15, D-Day minus 2, the brigade pilots destroyed several parked planes of Castro’s meager air force . The planes were destroyed by the brigade's pilots .
 A lone, artificially damaged B-26 flew directly to Miami, where its pilot claimed that he; had defected from the Cuban military and had just bombed his country’s airfields . That same day, as part of a pre-invasion ploy, a lone B-
 Snooping journalists noticed that the nose cone of the B-26 was metal . Cuban planes had plastic noses . The nose cone was metal; the Cuban plane had plastic .
 The President decided to cancel a second D-Day air strike against the remnants of the Cuban air force . The President, still insistent upon hiding American complicity, decided to hide American complicity .
 CIA officials protested, because they believed the invasion force could not succeed unless Castro’s few planes were knocked out . CIA officials said they thought the invasion would not succeed if it was knocked out of Cuba . The invasion force was eventually defeated, but the U.S. went on
 More than 1400 commandos motored in small boats to the beaches at Bahia de Cochinos . Shortly after midnight on April 17, more than 14 commandos were deployed .
 The invaders immediately tangled with Castro militia* Some commandos py yo LyvM AXjv-L \\) ic-t$ r :< v v vV THOMAS G PATERSON never made it, because their boats broke apart .
 Castro’s airplanes shot down two brigade B-26s and sank ships carrying communications equipment and ammunition . In the air, Castro's planes shot down B-27s and sunk ships in the water .
 Fighting ferociously, the brigade nonetheless failed to establish a beachhead . The brigade was fighting feroculously, but it was ultimately unsuccessful .
 Kennedy turned down CIA appeals to dispatch planes from nearby USS Essex . He did permit some jets to provide air cover for a new B-26 attack from Nicaragua .
 The B-26S arrived an hour after the jets had come and gone . Manned this time by American CIA pilots, the mission was carried out by CIA pilots .
 Stupid or not, Kennedy knew the answers to his own question . Kennedy asked an assistant to answer the question .
 First, he dearly sought to oust Castro and score a victory in the Cold War . Then he wanted to score a win over Castro in Cuba . Now he wants to oust him .
 Kennedy believed “that his disapproval of the plan would be a show of weakness inconsistent with his general stance.” Always driven to win, Kennedy believed that his disapproval would be “consistent with his . general stance”
 None of the President’s advisers wants it said of him by his colleagues that he loses his nerve when the going gets hot . President's advisers don't want to be seen as a leader who loses nerve .
 Harvard intellectuals are especially vulnerable, the more so from being new on the scene . The Harvard intellectuals have been particularly vulnerable, writes David Gergen . He says they are vulnerable because they are new to the Harvard scene .
 They are conscious of the fact that the tough-minded military suspect them of being soft-headed, they say . They are aware that the military suspects them of having soft heads .
 They have to show that they are he-men too, that they can act as well as lecture . They must show they can be he-man too, says the BBC .
 Told to disband, brigade members might have refused to give up their arms or even have mutineed . Brigade members might not have given up arms or have mutined their weapons .
 Republicans would have scorned a weak-kneed Administration . In any case, Republicans would've scorned the Administration . President Obama's administration has a history of missteps .
 Kennedy approved the operation, finally, because he felt a sense of urgency, Kennedy said . Kennedy approved it finally, finally because of a "sense of urgency," he said .
 Delay would permit the Soviets to strengthen the Cuban military, perhaps with MIG fighters . Delay would allow the Soviet Union to strengthen Cuba's military . The rainy season was about to begin, making military maneuver difficult .
 Guatemalan president beseeching Washington to move exiles out by late April . Guatemala's president is also facing awkward questions about Cuban trainees in his country .
 Bissell and Dulles have staunchly denied that they ever told the President that the invasion would ignite an eyVr island-wide rebellion against the Castro regime and thus ensure the ascendency of Miro’s provisional government .
 The CIA did not coordinate the invasion with the anti-Castro underground in Cuba . The agency feared leaks and the likely infiltration of opposition groups by Castro’s security forces . The CIA feared leaks from the CIA .
 The invasion site had been YSi shifted, and the mountains now lay some 80 miles away, with impassable swamps between . But because of the move, the invasion site was shifted, the mountains had to be moved 80 miles .
 CIA planners failed in other ways, including the belief in a rebellion . The guerrilla option was actually impossible .
 If they overestimated Cuban ti/v v JV discontent with Castro, they underestimated the effectiveness of his military . The Cuban government has been accused of over-reacting to Castro's military .
 They anticipated that he would crack; he expertly led his forces at the Bay of Pigs, where he had vacationed . He led forces in fact, leading them to victory in the war . He had been vacationing in Cuba .
 CIA-issued equipment malfunctioned; crucial communications gear was concentrated in one ship that sunk . Paratroopers did not drop far enough inland to cut off causeways; paratroopers didn't drop far too far inland .
 The CIA had been attempting since i960 to kill Fidel Castro, even employing Mafia thugs for the task . The CIA attempted to kill Castro with Mafia thugs .
 It seems likely that assassination was part of the general Bay of Pigs plan . Assassination was likely to have been part of a plan to kill the CIA .
 Bissell has admitted that he was hopeful “that Castro would be dead before the landing’s landing” Bissell said he hoped that Castro would have been dead before landing .
 Castro and Bissell have agreed that Cuban ’V w 0 t air supremacy was important to Cuba’s triumph . Castro: Cuban ‘V w. w 0. t . air supremacy’ was important in Cuba's triumph .
 A pre-emptive strike on D-Day against the Cuban air force 1 would not have delivered victory to the invaders . A strike would have been unlikely to deliver victory for the invasion of Cuba .
 La brigades 1400 men would have had to face Castro's army of 25,000 and the nation’s 200,000 militia . The brigades would have to face the army's army and the country's 200,00 militia . La brigade 1400 men could have faced the
 The commantljji dos most likely would not have survived the overwhelming power of 1 1 , V the Cuban military .
 Bissell 1 and Dulles were too emotionally committed to the project to see the shortcomings in their handiwork . Dulles and Bissell were too emotional committed to their work .
 CIA planners were less than candid . Am . >vith the President, for fear that he would terminate the project .
 CIA officials also contributed to the President’s thinking that American participation could be hidden and plausibly denied .
 Although the generals and admirals had serious reservations, they always evaluated the operation favorably . The operation was described as a success by the general and admiral .
 Sworn to secrecy, they did not seek close staff analysis of the CIA plan . The CIA plan is based on a secret document .
 A good soldier” who went along with the apparent consensus, he seemed to believe that he sould preside over debate rather than influence it, he said .
 "I wasn’t a colonel of infantry; I was sitting there in a very special cubicle," he says . "But I wasn't a colonel ... but I wasn”t a Colonel of infantry," he adds .
 I failed President Kennedy by not insisting that he ask a question that he did not ask. I failed to ask him a question, he says, "I failed to insist that he asked that he didn't ask," he says .
 By the time the Joint Chiefs had come in with Cuba '135 their sustained and prolonged bombing, their several divisions, a massive fleet, and their big air force, would have become obvious to the President that that little brigade didn’t have a chance at all .
 Rusk kept departmental intelligence and Cuban specialists in the dark . Rusk also kept Cuban intelligence, Cuban specialists out of the public eye .
 Kennedy encountered a good deal of dissenting opinion and he rejected it . Kennedy faced a lot of dissenting opinions and rejected it. Kennedy faced it .
 Schlesinger argued that time was not on Castro’s side and that the Cuban leader, at least for the moment, remained popular . He wrote several memoranda to the President, arguing time was actually not on his side .
 In making his decision, Kennedy bypassed Congress, ensuring he received limited advice . Kennedy bypasses Congress, bypassing Congress, further ensuring that he received only limited advice.
 Only Senator J William Fulbright, Foreign Relations Committee chairman, was let into the inner circle . Only Senator Fulbright was allowed into the circle, and only once .
 Fulbright sent the President a memorandum that strongly disapproved invasion of Cuba . It was “of a piece with the hypocrisy and cynicism for which the U.S. is constantly denouncing the Soviet Union”
 Kennedy invited the Arkansas senator to attend an April 4 meeting . Kennedy invited Kennedy to attend the meeting, which will take place on April 4 .
 Fulbright spoke forthrightly to the assembled top-level advisers, chiding them for exaggerating the Cuban threat . Fulbright told them to exaggerate the threat .
 Well-armed Castroites, including Fidel’s brother Raul and Che Guevara, would probably have initiated a protracted guerrilla war against the U.S. regime . The U.N. State Department says the death toll of Fidel Castro is likely to be higher than
 The Soviets might have helped these rebel forces, and volunteers from around the world might have swelled the resistance . Schlesinger had warned that the Spanish Civil War of the 1930s might have been like a Spanish civil war of the same era .
 The U.S. would have had to save its puppet government through military aid, advisers, and maybe even troops . The United States would have to save the puppet government .
 Secret presidential panel investigated the disaster . Kennedy and his advisers huddled in the dark during the crisis . Secret panel was investigating .
 Robert Kennedy became agitated, and “there was an almost frantic reaction for an action program which people would grab onto. Robert Kennedy was especially agitated,’s lawyer says . “There was almost a frantic reaction,” he says .
 Kennedy declared that ‘the complacent, the self-indulgent, the soft societies are about to be swept away with the debris of history.’
 When the Attorney General growled that Moscow would now judge America weak, Walt W Rostow commented that “we would have ample opportunity to prove we were not paper tigers in Berlin, Southeast Asia, and elsewhere . Rostow: “We would have . ample opportunity . to prove
 Cuban security forces rounded up, jailed, killed, or converted thousands of anti-regime subversives . Most of whom were surprised because the CIA had not forewarned them about D-Day .
 In the United States the Cuban Revolutionary Council splintered, as the Cuban community descended once again into fierce factionalism . In the U.S. the demoralized and angry Cuban community descends once again . The Cuban revolutionary council splinted, as a result of factional
 Castro triumphantly exploited patriotic nationalism to strengthen his regime . Castro triumphed in the fight to win support for his regime in Cuba .
 The botched Bay of Pigs operation drew Havana and Moscow closer together . Instead of driving the Soviets out of Cuba, the operation drew Moscow and Havana together . The operation was a success story for the Soviets .
 Castro feared another invasion, perhaps with American troops, may with Soviet troops . Castro sought Soviet military assistance from the Soviet Union in response to the invasion .
 The Soviets shipped small arms, machine guns, howitzers, armored personnel carriers, patrol boats, tanks, tanks and surface-to-air missiles . The Soviets also shipped nuclear missiles that could reach into the United States .
 The CIA created a huge operations station in Miami called JMWAVE to recruit and organize Cuban exiles . The CIA was encouraged by the White House .
 CIA-handled saboteurs burned cane fields, blew up factories and oil storage tanks . CIA-handled saboteur burned cane field fields and blew up factory and oil tank tanks .
 In a December 1961 raid, a seven-man team blasted a railroad bridge, derailed an approaching train, and torched a sugar warehouse . In December 1961, the raid, for example, blasted a railway bridge and derailed a train .
 Myriad exile groups, from Alpha 66 to the Revolutionary Student Directorate, left the Florida Keys to stage hit-and-run attacks along Cuba s coast . The attacks were carried out by a number of exile groups including Alpha 66 .
 Poisonous cigars, pills, j\4 l 7 and needles were directed at Castro’s way, but to no avail . Castro was never found guilty of any wrongdoing .
 Robert Kennedy learned about them in mid-1962, and his biographer claims that the Attorney General ordered an end to assassination projects . Robert Kennedy's biographer says he learned about the assassination projects in mid-'62 .
 John Kennedy said in general he disapproved of the killing of foreign leaders . Kennedy said at the time that in general . John Kennedy: "I don't think that killing foreign leaders is acceptable"
 The word “assassination* was never uttered in the presence of the President or committed to paper, so that he could be protected by the principle of plausible deniability . But, of course, the word ‘assassin* was . never uttered . in the . presence
 President Kennedy may or may not have known about the assassination plots, but he did set the general guidelines . So bespoke Bissell’s replacement, Richard Helms, was Richard Bissell . Helms replaced Bissell as President Kennedy's replacement . Bissell's replacement was Richard
 Intensified economic coercion joined assassination and sabotage as methods to undermine the Castro government . The Castro government was overthrown in Cuba in the 1960s .
 American officials did not expect the economic denial program alone to force Castro’s fall . U.S. officials say they expect economic denials to force the Castro regime to fall .
 Cuba’s economic development is decelerating socialization, spurring Cuban discontent . Cuba's appeal as a model for Latin America is diminished, Cuban president says . But the island's economic development has been slow, he says .
 Cuba was forced to pay higher freight costs, enlarge its foreign debt, and suffer innumberable factory shut-downs due to the lack of spare parts once bought in the U.S. Cuba's factories were forced to shut down .
 Cuba’s economic woes also stemmed from the flight of technicians and managers, a decline in tourism, high worker absenteeism, and the drying up of foreign capital investment . The country's economic woes have also been blamed for the fall in tourism and foreign investment .
 By 1962, 82 percent of Cuba’s exports flowed to Communist countries, and 85 percent of its imports came from them . Cuba was forced to rely heavily on Communist countries .
 Diplomatic contact between Cubans and Americans virtually ceased, with two exceptions . Diplomatic relations between the U.S. and Cuba also virtually ceased .
 In May 1961 Castro offered to trade Bay of Pigs prisoners for American farm tractors . White House encouraged a private committee of distinguished Americans to negotiate with Cuba .
 The Tractors-for-Freedom Committee could not reach terms and disbanded . The committee could not agree terms and was disbanded .
 Castro released brigade members in exchange for food and medicine in December 1962 . In December 1962, Castro released the brigade members . The brigade was released by Castro in return for medicine and food .
 Che first thanked Goodwin for the Bay of Pigs it had thp cnliHifv its nower. Che thanked him for his role in the capture of Cuba .
 Che asked for a modus vivendi with Washington and urged talks on trade, compensation for nationalized property, and Guantanamo . Che also asked for talks on compensation, compensation and Guantanamo, he said .
 Cuba would even be willing to discuss its ties with the Soviets anB Cuban activities in the hemisphere . Cuba would also discuss its relations with the Soviet Union in the 1980s .
 Goodwin carried the promising August 17 overture to Kennedy, who, smoking one of Che's cigars, listened to his aide’s appeal for further dialogue with the Cubans . Goodwin carried out the promising overture .
 Kennedy officials spoke frankly about getting rid of Castro Castro . After all, some Washington politicians were shouting for invasion . Kennedy officials said they were prepared to get rid of him .
 It may be plausibly argued that, had there been no exile expedition, no destructive covert activities, and no economic and diplomatic boycott, there would not have been an October missile crisis . Had there been a concerted U.S. vendetta to quash the Cuban Revolution, the crisis
 Kennedy’s unvarnished hostility toward Cuba was the source of the crisis . Castro's understandable apprehension that U.S. invasion was inevitable was inevitable . Kennedy's hostility to Cuba led to the crisis in Cuba .
 The origins of the missile crisis derived largely from United States-Cuban tensions . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades .
 To stress only the global dimension of SovietAmerican competition, as is commonly done, is like saying that a basketball game can't be played without a court . To stress the global dimensions of Soviet American competition is like playing without a basketball court, it's like a court without a floor .
 The emplacement of nuclear missiles in Cuba served the Soviet strategic goal of catching up in the nuclear arms race . Khrushchev would never have had the opportunity to begin his dangerous missile game if Kennedy had not been attempting to ( ^xpungfeX astro)
 Castro and other Cuban olficials made repeated, consistent, and compelling statements that their nation faced an American onslaught . Castro and others made repeated statements that the U.S. was at risk .
 They did not say so publicly, of course, for such would have acknowledged their own responsibility for generating the fear . They didn't say publicly, but they did acknowledge their own .
 In September 1962, CIA analysts concluded that “the main purpose of the present military buildup in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there against what the Cubans and Soviets conceive to be a danger that the U.S. may attempt to overthrow it”
 Cubans “felt progressively \ more secure as the work [Soviet installation of military equipment] advanced.” Cubans felt “properly ... more secure” as the Soviet military equipment was installed, the author says .
 Cubans confused about the type of missiles they would receive . Perhaps the Cubans were confused about what missiles they'd receive .
 Khrushchev and Gamal Abdul Nasser discussed “rockets” and “missiles” for Egypt . During the 1958 Middle East crisis, U.S. troops landed in Lebanon, when American troops landed .
 Nasser betrayed considerable ignorance about the details of these weapons, as perhaps Castro did later . Nasser betray considerable ignorance of the details about the weapons, perhaps even more .
 The Cubans may not have paid much attention to missile type, because to them more powerful weapons simply meant more deterrence . The Cuban government may have paid little attention to the missile type .
 The U.S. may have assumed impressive surface-to-surface missiles were necessary for true deterrence against an aggressive United States . Or they may have thought that impressive surface to-surface missile missiles were needed .
 U.S. assumed Japanese would surrender only under threat of annihilation from the atomic bomb . American assumption was similar at end of Second World War .
 On October 14 an American U-2 plane photographed missile sites in Cuba, thus providing the first “hard” evidence, as distinct from the “soft” reports of exiles that the island was becoming a nuclear base .
 The President convened his top advisers shortly before noon on October 16 . The President convenes with his top aides at the White House .
 His first questions focused on the firing readiness of the missiles and the probability that they carried nuclear warheads . His first question was whether the missiles could be carrying nuclear warheads.
 The tentative answers were negative, although he was advised that the missiles could become operational in a brief time . He was told they could be operational within a matter of days .
 McGeorge Bundy urged consideration not only of military plans but of a “political track” or diplomacy . Bundy urges consideration of consideration of military or political plans . Bundy: "There is no military strategy for the United States"
 When McNamara mentioned that diplomacy might precede military action, the President immediately switched the discussion to another question . McNamara: "Diplomatic might ... precede [military] action"
 Conspicuously absent j from this first meeting was a serious probing of Soviet and Cuban j motivation .
 Bundy then posed a question now central to the history of the missile crisis . Bundy then asked the question: 'What do you think? What do you know about the crisis?' Bundy says .
 Kennedy lamely answered, "Yeah, but that was five years ago. That was five . Not liking j the sound of a double standard, Kennedy said, Yeah . Kennedy said it was a mistake .
 Kennedy’s group of advisers, named the Executive Committee or Ex Comm, met frequently in tight secrecy . For the next several days, Kennedy's advisers met in secrecy . Kennedy's group met in secret .
 McNamara persistently argued this alternative against the generals, Dillon, McCone, and Acheson, all of whom urged an air strike . McNamara persistedently argued against this alternative .
 In other words, some missiles in Cuba would remain in place for firing against the U.S. Some missiles would remain for firing .
 Attorney General insists there would be no ‘Pearl Harbor type of attack’ on his brother’s record . In any case, the Attorney General insisted, there would no “Pearl Pearl type of . attack”
 The chief decision was to quarantine Cuba to prevent further military shipments . The quarantine was to impress the Soviets with American resolve to force the missiles out .
 If the Soviets balked, other, more drastic, measures would be undertaken . The U.S. would have to take action against the Soviet Union .
 The second decision was to inform the Soviets of U.S. policy through a television address rather than through diplomatic channels . The decision was made by the Soviets rather than by diplomatic channels.
 Former Ambassador to the Soviet Union Charles Bohlen advised that Moscow would have to retaliate against the U.S. after its technicians were killed by American bombs . Bohlen said Moscow would retaliate after the loss of technicians .
 A stern letter to Khrushchev should be “tested” as a method to gain withdrawal of the missiles . The letter should be tested as a way to get the missiles to be withdrawn .
 Kennedy’s evening television speech on October 22 sounded familiar themes in American diplomatic history . Kennedy's speech was the first of a series of speeches by the president to address the U.S. Embassy in Washington .
 President Obama recalled the special U.S. relationship with the Western Hemisphere . He reminded Americans that 1930s lessons taught them to resist aggression and surrender .
 The President lectured the Soviets to reverse their “deliberately provocative” decision by dismantling their ‘strategic” missiles in Cuba . He announced the Caribbean quarantine as an “initial” step .
 The United States Information Agency beamed his words around the world in thirty-seven languages, including Spanish for Cuba itself . The U.S. Information Agency was beamed across the world .
 The Soviets did not mobilize or redeploy their huge military, nor did they take measures to make their strategic forces less vulnerable . Strangely, the Soviets didn't take steps to redeploy or make their military more resilient .
 On the 26th, Kennedy and some Ex Comm members, thinking that the Soviets were stalling, soured on the quarantine . Kennedy thought that the quarantine was stalling . The quarantine was quarantined until the end of the month .
 Kennedy approved a State Department message to Brazil that invited its ambassador in Havana to talk with Castro about the “great jeopardy” in which the Soviet missiles had placed his government in danger . Kennedy also approved a message that invited Brazil's ambassador to Cuba to talk about the "great jeopardy
 The Cubans could expect to suffer “desperate hand-to-mouth existence” under an expanded American quarantine . The U.S. has expanded a quarantine of Cuba .
 For the first time in the Kennedy presidency, as nuclear war threatened, Washington was suggesting an accommodation of Cuban-American differences . Washington suggested an accommodation in Cuba for first time .
 The “first real blink” in the crisis came in the afternoon of the 26th, the President himself “doubted that it would do any good .” m . This overture, however, may have represented no more than a ploy to divide Moscow and Havana
 A Soviet embassy officer, Aleksander Fomin, called ABC corresponon on John Scali . Fomin asked for a meeting with Scali at the Soviet Embassy in Moscow .
 Scali sent emissary back to Fomin with the reply that American leaders were interested in discussing the proposal . Scali scurried to Rusk, who sent him back with the message . Rusk sent Scali back to Russia, where he was assassinated in 1877 .
 The way out of the crisis, Harriman said, was to let Khrushchev save face through an agreement to withdraw the Jupiters .
 Khrushchev would gain politically on his tough-minded military and “swing” toward improved relations with the U.S. Such a bargain would also permit Khrrushchev to gain political gains .
 Moscow no doubt calculated that Washington would attempt to halt shipments of missiles . Moscow may have calculated differently, and thus tried to sneak them in, Moscow says .
 An American U-2 plane overflew the eastern part of the Soviet Union, probably because equipment malfunctioned . Equipment malfunctioned during the flight .
 Soviet fighters scrambled to intercept it, and American jets from Alaska took flight to rescue the errant aircraft . U.S. planes from Alaska were able to intercept the aircraft .
 Moscow might have read the incident as provocative . The spy plane flew home without sparking a dog fight .
 Cubans fought Soviet soldiers for control of SAM sites . Cubans may have brought down the U-2 . U.2 may have been shot down by Soviet forces .
 A distressed McNamara now thought “invasion had become almost inevitable” But Kennedy hesitated to retaliate, surely scared about taking a step in the direction of nuclear war .
 The President decided to ignore Khrushchev’s second letter and answer the first .
 The President ordered the calling up of Air Force reservists . The President has ordered the call up of reservists to replace the troops .
 The crisis had passed — just when the nuclear giants seemed at the brink . But the crisis had since passed, just when it seemed to be at its worst .
 The IL-28 bombers were also crated and shipped back to the Soviet Union . IL-27 bombers were crated in the USSR and shipped home .
 Alerts serve to prepare American forces for war, but carry the danger of escalation . Move to a high category might be read by an adversary as American planning for a first strike . Alerts also carry the risk of escalation, because movement may be read as a strike .
 Under such circumstances, the adversary might be tempted to strike first . The president of the U.S. Senate is expected to make a speech at the White House .
 The Navy’s antisubmarine warfare activities carried the potential of escalating the crisis . Finally, the U.S. Navy's anti-submarine activities carry the potential to escalate the crisis, it says .
 Soviet submarines prowled near the quarantine line, and, following standing orders, Navy ships forced several of them to surface . Soviet submarines were forced to surface by standing orders .
 Ex Comm members represented considerable intellectual talent and experience, and the policy they urged upon the President ultimately forced the Soviets to back down . Ex Comm. members represented .
 A mythology of grandeur, illusion of control, and embellishment of performance have obscured the history of the committee . But the committee's "grandeur" has obscured its history, says the author .
 Kennedy picked his advisers, directed them to drive missiles out, and used his brother as a “policeman” at meetings . In an example of “promotional leadership,” Kennedy picked advisers and directed them . He picked his brother to be a ‘p
 Vice Admiral Charles Wellborn: “Emotional state and nervous tension that was involved in it had this effect.” Vice Admiral Wellborn said .
 Robert Kennedy remembered that the Secretary of State “frequently could not attend our meetings,” because “he had a virtually complete breakdown mentally and physically.” Robert Kennedy . Robert Kennedy remembers that the secretary of state had a “virtually complete breakdown”
 A/ star/ might have received a better hearing and the world might have been spared the confrontation .
 Contemporaries and scholars debate Kennedy’s shunning of formal, private negotiations and traditional, diplomatic channels . Kennedy opted instead for a public showdown through a surprise television speech .
 Even before his television address he knew that many of the missiles were ready to fire . Ex Comm worked under the assumption that the SS-4S were armed with nuclear warheads . It does not appear that he thought the Soviets would protract talks until the missiles had become fully operational .
 Popular political position most likely would have been an air strike and invasion to rid the island of both the missiles and Castro . Politics does not explain his decisions, but politics does not .
 Kennedy seems to have leaned toward McNamara’s argument that the missiles in Cuba did not make a difference . The Soviets already possessed enough capability to inflict unacceptable damage on some U.S. cities .
 President Kennedy eschewed diplomatic talks before October 22 because his strong Cold War views, drawing of lessons from the past, and personal hostility toward Castro’s Cuba recommended confrontation . Kennedy: “I don’t want to see any more of the Cold War, I want to
 His conspicuous style of boldness, toughness, and craving for victory also influenced him . He resented Khrushchev had tried to trick him by stating that no offensive weapons would be placed in Cuba and then clandestinely sending them .
 Kennedy had warned Moscow not to station such weapons on the island . If he did not force the Soviets to back down, he worried, his personal credibility would have been undermined .
 O 1 lA .y; v markedly change the strategic balance . New missiles in Cuba gave A'd'% the appearance of doing so .
 Kennedy agreed that the matter was as much “political” as “military.” One Ex Comm member remarked that the question is “psychological,” and Kennedy agreed . Kennedy said the matter is as much political as military .
 With other tests in Berlin and Southeast Asia looming, the U.S. believed it had to make emphatic its determination to stand firm in the Cold War . Cuba, Cuba and the United States stood firm in Cuba .
 President Obama suspended diplomacy by suspending diplomacy in favor of public confrontation . Then he reacted to the crisis with public confrontation, he suspended diplomacy . Obama has been criticized for his handling of the crisis .
 In order to postpone doomsday, the U.S. moderated the American response and compromised, he compromised . "In order to avoid a high-casualty invasion of Cuba," he said .
 He and Ex Comm gave little attention to a proposal that Brazil had offered in the U.N. to denuclearize Latin America . The proposal was rejected by the Ex Comm Comm .
 This proposal also sought to guarantee the territorial integrity of each nation in the region . This proposal was proposed to guarantee each nation's territorial integrity .
 Great Britain could hold American missiles, but Turkey and Italy could not . Great Britain was able to keep American missiles from Turkey, Italy and Turkey . Turkey could not have American missiles .
 Harriman presented his scheme “as a first and important step towards disarmament,” but Kennedy officials only briefly discussed the question .
 Under this provisions, both American and Soviet militaries would leave Cuba, Latin America would become off-limits to nuclear weapons . Cuba’s territorial integrity would be guaranteed, and Moscow and Washington would make a modest nod toward arms control .
 Castro may have grasped an opportunity to begin a process toward improved relations with Washington . Given his extreme anger with Moscow after the Soviets disengaged the missiles, Castro may well have grasped a chance to start a process .
 Such a bargain, of course, would have required Cuban-American discussions . Such a deal would have been possible, but it would have had to be negotiated .
 The Soviets, exposed as nuclear inferiors, vowed to catch up in the arms race . The Soviets were exposed as inferiors to the West .
 At the same time, perhaps the “jagged Judges” of Kennedy's Cold Warriorism were smoothed . At the time, maybe the ‘jagged judges’ of Kennedy’s Cold Warrioristism were smoother .
 The nuclear war scare during the missile crisis also nudged the superpowers to conclude the longstanding talks on a test ban treaty . The treaty was reached after the missile scare in the 1950s .
 Some analysts have trumpeted the treaty as a major accomplishment because it started the superpowers on a path toward arms control . But the agreement did not prevent a plethora of underground nuclear detonations or slow the cascading arms race .
 The President showed some interest in accommoda/li° n at the same time that he reinvigorated anti-Cuban programs . The Administration created a new State Department office, the Coordinator of Cuban Affairs .
 Castro had sought better relations with Washington after the missile crisis . Castro had made gestures toward detente with the United States .
 He sent home thousands of Soviet military personnel and released some political prisoners, including a few Americans . He also released thousands of political prisoners .
 CIA makes contact with traitorous Cuban official, Rolando Cubela Secades . CIA quickly cranked up new dirty tricks and revitalized assassination option .
 In Florida, American officials intercepted and arrested saboteurs heading for Cuba, but they seldom prosecuted and usually released them . In Cuba, the Cuban government often released them after arrests .
 Alpha 66 and Commando L raiders hit oil facilities, sugar mills, and industrial plants . Alpha 66, Commando L raids hit oil and sugar factories .
 The Cuban government signaled once again its interest in improving relations with Stevenson's U.N. William Attwood .
 The President authorized an eager Attwood to work up an agenda with the Cubans . Attwood is expected to meet with the President of Cuba .
 In late October, when Kennedy met with the French journalist Jean Daniel, he spoke in both hard-line and conciliatory tones about Cuba . The President spoke with Daniel in a meeting in October .
 Kennedy asked Daniel Daniel to return to the White House for another White House discussion . Daniel was traveling to Havana to interview Castro Castro .
 Castro later claimed that Daniel carried a “private message ^ from Kennedy, who asked about the prospects for a Cuban-American dialogue . Daniel Castro claimed that Kennedy asked about prospects for Cuban-Americans .
 Kennedy sounded less the concilia; ;> o tor and more the warrior. Yet, on November 18, Kennedy spoke less than concilia . Yet, he said, "I am a warrior. I am a fighter"
 On November 22, while discussing chances for Cuban-American detente, the news of the assassination in Dallas arrived . The assassination occurred on November 22 .
 Several official investigations have concluded Cuban officials played no part in the assassination . Conspiracy theories persist, but conspiracy theories persist .
 For Kennedy and Castro to have reached detente, each would have had to suppress ideological biases . Each would have to suppress their strong ideological biases to reach detente .
 It does not seem likely that either Kennedy, had he lived, or Castro could have overcome the roadblocks that they and their national interests had erected .
 The Cuban-American confrontation was and is a question of the Cold War, domestic American politics, and personalities . The U.S. and Cuba have been at odds for decades over the years .
 U.S. hegemony in the hemisphere has been faltering in recent years . But it has been primarily a question of faltering United States hegemony in hemisphere . The United States has been in the region for decades .
 In the end, he failed— he did not achieve his well-defined and ardently pursued goals for Cuba . "In the end of the year he failed," he said .
 Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense, International Security Af' fairs, “ United States Policies Toward Latin American Military Forces,” February 25, 1965, Vol. Vol. of the U.S. Foreign Policy Manual .
 The Kennedy Administration actually discouraged Bosch from purging his security forces of Trujillist elements . Bosch's security forces were purged by the Kennedy Administration .
 Ruth Leacock, “JFK, Business, and Brazil,” Hispanic American Historical Review LIX (No.65. 2015) “Brazil’s economy, business, politics, and business are key to its success,’ she says .
 Abraham J; L ° wen ' thal, ‘Liberal, Radical, and ‘Bureaucratic’ Perspectives,” Latin American Research Review VIII (Spring Chapter 5) Abraham J. The Recent Latin American Policy of the United States .
 Richard 7 Bissell in Peter Collier and David Horowitz, The Kennedy’s ^ 3. Richard Bissell . Peter Coller and David . Horowitz, David Horowitz . David . Collier . David. Horowitz .
 See, for example, Ernest R May, “Writing Contemporary International History,” Diplomatic History VIII , i<>57.57.
 Theodore Draper popularized the bdrajai theme in his Castro’s Revolution and Caslroi Y °i2 k ’ ’ Richard N Goodwin, The American Condition (Garden City)
 Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Jr., A Thousand Days (Boston 1965), 224. Quoted in Arthur M. Schlesingers, Jr. "A Thousand Days"
 United States Responses to Revolutionary Change in Latin America , 185. U.S. responded to Latin America's struggle for freedom of expression .
 William D Pawley, “Memoirs” (unpublished manuscript, Coral Gables, FL,d), ch. ch. William Pawley . Pawley’s work was published in the 1940s and 1950s .
 Philip W. Bonsai, Cuba, Castro, and the United States (Pittsburgh PA I 97 i), 192. The artist's work was published in Cuba, Cuba and Cuba .
 How the CIA Waged a Silent War Against Cuba,” Harper’s Magazine CCLI * 50. 50.
 Lee Lockwood, Castro’s Cuba, Cuba's Fidel Castro, is a Pulitzer Prize-winning author . Mankiewicz and Jones, With Fidel, 152, have written about Cuba .
 Barton J Bernstein, “Bombers, Inspections, and the No Invasion Pledge,” Foreign Service Journal LVI , 8-12. Barton J. Bernstein, "Bomber, Inspectors, and a No.I. Pledge"
 Raymond L Garthoff, “The Cuban ‘Contras’ Caper,” Washington Post, October 25, 1987 . The Cuban "Contras" were involved in the 1987 Cuban coup .
 Alexander L George, “The Impact of Crisis-Induced Stress on Decision Making,” in Frederic Solomon and Robert Q Marston, eds., The Medical Implications of Nuclear War , 541. George . George: Crisis-induced stress on decision-making
 Department of State to American Embassy, Paris, May 11, 1963, DSR; Foy Kohler to Secretary of State, July 31, 1963 . Foy Kohler to American Embassy to French Embassy in Paris, June 30, 1963; . DSR to American
 Speech to Zionists of America, August 26, i960, in United States Senate, Committee on Commerce, Committee of Commerce, and. The Speeches, Remarks, Press Conferences, and Press . Conferences .