 In 1959 Fidel CASTRO over through a corrupt dictator called BATISTA in a communist revolution . Fidel CasTRO took over in 1959 from a corrupt dictatorship called BATisTA .
 Eisenhower government had come up with a plan to over throw Castro . Castro took over American run industries and did not provide compensation for their owners .
 America had trained a force of 1400 anti-Castro Cubans for an invasion of the Island . America had also trained an army of 14,000 Cubans to prepare for invasion .
 20000 Cuban troops were met by 20000 troops armed with tanks and modern weapons which were supplied by Russia .
 Castro sought closer co-operation with Russia . Castro was humiliated by the USA . The USA was humiliated and Castro sought Russia's cooperation .
 The Bay of Pigs taught Kennedy to be cautious of simply accepting advice of military experts . Kennedy was cautious of accepting military experts' advice on the invasion .
 Khrushchev said he was dealing with a weak and indecisive leader in Kennedy . Kennedy was the leader of the Soviet Union in the 1960s . Khrushchevitch said Kennedy was a weak leader .
 June 1962 shipments of ""defensive" weapons were shipped into Cuba from the soviet union . Russia began to adapt a more aggressive attitude towards America .
 U2 spy planes photographed medium range offensive missiles capable of reaching most of the major U.S. cities on 14 October 1962 . The missiles were believed to be medium range weapons capable of hitting the major US cities .
 USA had greater nuclear power than the USSR and could destroy it, therefore the USSR would never use the missiles . The USSR never used the missiles, therefore it would not use them . The U.S. could destroy the USSR if it were to destroy it .
 The Soviet Union could retaliate by blocking Berlin as they did in 1948 . Berlin could also block Berlin as it did with Berlin in 1948, according to reports .
 USA had a strong navy and could still take on other options if this did not work . USA still had strong navy in the world and could take on more options .
 Kennedy receives a letter from Khrushchev saying that the Soviet Ships will not observe the blockade . Tuesday 23 October . Kennedy received a letter saying that Soviet ships will not be subject to the blockade.
 At 10:32am the 20 closest Soviet ships to the zone turn around or stop . At 10,32am, 20 Soviet ships turned around or stopped in the zone . The zone was closed to the Soviet Union at the time .
 Ariel footage shows that work on the missile bases is still proceeding rapidly . Despite intensive footage, work is still continuing rapidly .
 Kennedy receives a long personal letter from Khrushchev claiming that the missiles are purely defensive . Friday 26 October . Saturday, October 26, 1962 .
 Khrushchev said he would remove the missiles if Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba and called off the naval blockade . Kennedy also promised to remove missiles if he called off a naval blockade of Cuba . The missiles were removed in exchange for a promise to end the blockade .
 Khrushchev sent a second letter saying He would only remove the Cuban missiles if Kennedy removed his from Turkey . Saturday 27 October . Khhrushchev sent the letter to Kennedy .
 The President is advised to send an immediate attack on Cuba but Kennedy delays the attack . The President was advised to attack Cuba .
 He also ignours the second letter and agrees to the term of the first letter and says that if the Soviet Union does not withdraw an attack will follow . He also agrees to a second letter .
 Khrushchev agreed to Kennedy and started removing missiles on the 3rd November from Cuba .
 To test the USA, missiles were deisnged to see how strong the USA really was . In the strained atmosphere of the Cold War politics the missiles were used to test the US .
 khrushchev was so concerned about the missile gap between the U.S. and USSR that he siezed the opportunity to get the upper hand in the Arms race .
 Khrushchev wanted the USA to find the missiles and be drawn into a nuclear war . To trap the USA Khrushche wanted the U.S. to find them, he said .
 Kennedy came out of the crisis with a greatly improved reputation in his own country and throughout the west . Kennedy's reputation was greatly improved in the aftermath of the war .
 His role of a responsible peacemaker was highlighted by his role of taking the first role towards peace . His role was highlighted as a responsible peacemaker .
 Both leaders saw how close they came to nuclear war and were more willing to take steps to prevent the outbreak of nuclear war . Both leaders were willing to try to prevent nuclear war.
 A permanent 'hot line' phone link was set up directly between the White House and Kremlin . A permanent phone link has been set up between the two countries .