 It is the gateway to your future; it is the means to enter tertiary institutions . It is your opportunity to create the career of your dreams. It is also your chance to create your own career. It's the means of entry to tertiary colleges.
 It is not easy to accomplish but it can be done with hard work and dedication . prioritising your time and effort to ensure that you cover as much content as possible in order to be well prepared .
 "I cannot stress the importance and value of revision in preparing for the examinations," says the author of the book . "Revising is the most important part of preparation for the exams," she says .
 Once you have covered all the content and topics, you should start working through the past examination papers . Then check your answers with the memoranda. Check your answers .
 Mind the Gap Series is a weekly series of questions that test readers' knowledge of topics in the news . Submit the questions at the top of each day's list of questions . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com's "Mind the
 It has been developed to assist you to achieve a minimum of 40% in the examinations, if you work hard and follow the advice and guidance provided in the book .
 Work hard, persevere, work every day, read and write every day to ensure that you are successful . Use this valuable resource which has been developed especially for YOU, work hard and persevere .
 The purpose of this booklet is to guide you through these levels and equip you with skills to respond to these questions . This booklet is designed to help you with these questions and answers .
 This booklet is a guide that should be used in conjunction with textbooks and other resources . It is intended to be used as a guide to help students with reading comprehension skills .
 Every Section starts with a mind map to give you an overview of content covered in the topic . SOURCE – BASED QUESTIONS – Every Section begins with a question mark .
 This section gives you the opportunity to check whether you have addressed the questions correctly . Use this section to test your knowledge of events in this article's Newsquiz .
 You are given three types of essays with approaches to answer the question . You are also given an essay with a different approach to each question .
 Please note the guidelines provided before attempting to answer the essays . Use these questions to help students understand today's featured news stories .
 China's economic liberalisation on relations with the rest of the world since Mao’s death . Tibet, India, Vietnam, Taiwan, Taiwan . China as a superpower. China as superpower .
 USA of missiles discovered the CUBAN MISSILE discovered . Soviet missiles Cuba / Turkey . USA of missile discovered .
 An ideological war between USA and the Cold War Soviet Union . An economic system driven by personal freedom of Capitalism choice, investment, investment . Capitalism over the control of Cuba . Capitalism and the use of labour choice .
 The source will be contextualised it will indicate what the source is about, why it was written, who wrote the source, when it is written and where the event took place . The source is then contextualised to indicate what it is about .
 The Bay of Pigs was Cuba's attempt to win over the Soviet Union in 1962 . Castro sought and received support from the USSR, and the U.S. observed weapons in Cuba . The Bay was a major source of intelligence in the United States .
 Khrushchev secretly started to send nuclear weapons to Cuba . August September: Khruschev secretly sent weapons to the island nation . September was the first anniversary of the war .
 Khrushchev had cleverly orchestrated his arms buildup in Cuba to disguise the inclusion of offensive missiles and nuclear weapons in Cuba . The Cuban government's arms buildup included offensive missiles, nuclear weapons .
 In 1962 he sent a high-level delegation to Cuba to propose the placement of nuclear weapons on the island . In May 1962 he had sent a delegation to Havana .
 Both countries worked out the details of a treaty to deploy the nuclear weapons, under Soviet control . Over the next few months both countries agreed to work out a treaty .
 The Cubans initially proposed that the deployment be made public as a way of preventing an American attack . Interestingly, the Cuban government initially said the deployment would not be public . The U.S. has not responded to the request .
 Khrushchev wanted to confront the Americans with an accomplished fact… On September 25, 1962, Castro proudly announced the Soviets would build a new fishing port for the Cuban just north of the American-occupied Guantanamo Bay base .
 U.S. intelligence experts were not convinced of the projected port’s peaceful mission . American intelligence experts said they were skeptical of the project .
 Eyewitness reports from refugees and agents on the ground in Cuba continued to provide additional information about newly arrived missiles .
 The IL-28 Beagle bombers were capable of carrying nuclear weapons from Cuba to targets in the U.S. They were found in crates that contained nuclear weapons .
 Angola was part of the Cold War bloc in the 1950s and 1960s . Angola was a key ally of the Soviet Union, Cuba and the United States .
 Propaganda: An Information, economicespecially system ofdriven a biasedbyorpersonal misleading freedom nature, usedoftochoice, promoted investment a political of cause capital and usedofthe or point use of labour and resources to make profit .
 A coup in Portugal removed the Caetano government by pro-democratic military junta . Pro-democratic junta that was ready to offer independence to Angola in 1974 offered independence in 1974 .
 Portugal led the liberation movements to the Alvo Agreement, 15 January 1975 . Portugal was one of the countries leading liberation movements in the country . Portugal signed the agreement in 1975 .
 The Alvo Agreement led to the establishment of a tripartite transitional government . The agreement was signed in 1991 . It led to a tri-party government .
 Liberation movements were to share power until the elections of 11 November 1975 . Liberation movements shared power until elections were held on 11 November .
 Jonas Savimbi, leader of UNITA, sent letter to President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, after MPLA attack on Huambo .
 The machine of war that Cuba and the Soviet Union have assembled in Angola is beyond imagination . Cuba and Russia have assembled a war machine in Angola . The Soviet Union and Cuba have been involved in the war .
 "To prevent the total destruction of our forces we have decided to revert immediately to guerrilla warfare," says President Vladimir Putin .
 The friends (the CIA and United States) that have promised to help us did not fulfil their promises and we must face our own fate with courage and determination . "We must face their own fate," says President Obama .
 I am sending with this my mother, who is seventy-one years’ old, to Zambia so that she will be able to die in Zambia . She is sending it with her mother who is 71 years' old .
 The wife of the Secretary General with two children and the wife of our commanding General with four children . Accompanying them are the wives of the . Secretary General and the . wife of a commanding General .
 The Political Bureau of the Central Committee of UNITA joins me to thank you once more for everything . The Political Party of the United States joins me once again for everything.
 I have always tried to the best of my ability and courage to serve the interests of Angola and Africa, says president . "I have always been very committed to Angola's interests and Africa's interests," says president of Angola .
 "I am not a traitor to Africa. I stand for my principles," says President Obama . "Hard days that we expect ahead will prove to the world that I stand against my principles" says Obama .
 "In Angola, might has made right, but I will remain in the bush to cry for justice," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "I will remain ... to cry out for justice. In Angola, may may have made right"
 Explain the historical term guerrilla warfare in the context of the Angolan civil war . Read Source 4A 4.1.1 .
 The Black Power Movement has been described as the "Black Power Movement" and "The Movement of Black Power" has been credited with the success of the movement . The movement was founded by the African-American civil rights group The Movement of African-Americans in 1968 .
 Carmichael was elected national chair of Student Non-violence Coordination Committee in May 1966 . Carmichael had largely lost faith in the theory of non-violent resistance that he and SNCC had once held dear .
 It is a call for the Black people to define their own gaols, to lead their own organisation . The Black people are being called to 'defend their own' gaols .
 Carmichael's break with Martin Luther King’s doctrine of nonviolence and its end of goal of racial integration . Carmichael also represented a break with King's nonviolence doctrine . Black Power also represented the end of the goal of integration, Carmichael said .
 Identify two visual clues that shows the two activists were proud of their African heritage 5.2. Identify a visual clue that shows that they were proud to be African . Identify the clues that show that the activist was proud of his African heritage .
 Identify two visual clues that shows the two were proud of their African heritage . 5.2.3 Explain why, you think youphotograph this, think this, photograph was taken was taken .
 Communism A political and economic system in which all property is publicly owned and wealth is divided among citizens equally or according to individual needs 1.1. Communism is a political and . economic system that all property and wealth are publicly owned . It is also known as Communism .
 Brinkmanship A strategy to push a rival to the verge of war with the intension to withdraw from the conflict 1.1.1 . A strategy for pushing a rival into the brink of war is a strategy to avoid war .
 It is a call for Black people in this country to unite, recognize their heritage and build a sense of community . It is also a call to define their own gaols, to lead their own organisation .
 Malcolm X and Maya Angelou are wearing traditional African attire . Both activists are wearing African attire and the afro hairstyle by Maya .
 Give your verdict as to what extent a statement or findings within a piece of evidence are true . Critically discuss what you think are true or agree with them . Criticise the evidence and give your verdict .
 Provide evidence taken from a wide range of sources, which both agree with and contradict an argument . Find out what sources both agree on and contradict each other .
 Come to a final conclusion, basing your decision on what you judge to be the most important factors and justify how you have made your choice .
 Underline the instruction verb, question focus, direction given to the content focus and timeframes . Use the text to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 You are expected to take a stance and use evidence to support your stance . You are also expected to use evidence and evidence to back your stance.
 In the body of the essay, you should use the evidence mentioned in your introduction to further elaborate your stance . Use the evidence in your body of your essay to further elaborate your stance in the body .
 The effort fails for the most part because of administrative weakness aggravated by bad weather, says CNN.com.com .
 In Little Rock 9 African-American students were chosen to enter a white school to start desegregation Outcome/ Governor supported the parents who did not want to have mixed schools . Education in the South was still segregated .
 You need to highlight whether Mao Zedong’s policies of the Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution were a dismal failure or not . You also need to indicate how you would support your line of argument .
 You should take a stance by explaining what extent various forms of protests by the civil rights activists were successful in ensuring that all Americans regardless of race were treated equally in United States of America .
 On 10 May 1963, the city’s businesses and municipality announced that municipal facilities would be desegregated . The city's businesses and the city's municipality announced the move .
 The TRC Question focus: Negotiated settlement . Various forms of justice and the Government of National Unity . Reasons for the TRC hearings include reasons for the hearings .
 You need to prepare thoroughly on all aspects mentioned in the mind map below . Please prepare thoroughly for the Black Consciousness Maze .
 You are advised NOT to spot certain sections that you think will be examined . Don't spot certain areas of the book that you expect to be examined.
 Black Consciousness and non-racialism are key concepts in the concept of consciousness . The concept of non-racism is defined as non-racey .
 Mamphela Ramphele, co-founder of Zanemphilo Community Health Centre, used the gendered language of the time . ‘Black man, you are on your own’ was a rallying cry coined by Barney Pityana and popularised by Steve B
 The extract below focuses on the reasons for the emergence of the Black Consciousness philosophy and its subsequent impact . The extract is an extract of an extract from an interview with the author of the book "Black Consciousness" The book is published in the Black Book, Black Culture .
 In the late 1960s the philosophy of Black Consciousness began to gain influence . The philosophy of black consciousness began to become more prominent .
 Organisation set out to win black communities to its cause . Thousands of followers eager to break out of the mould of their parents’ resignation .
 In 1972 SASO, together with leaders from other African educational and religious bodies, came together to form the Black People’s Convention . SASO aimed to mobilise South Africans around the Black Consciousness ideology .
 Truth and Reconciliation Committees to reconcile South Africa from its divided past . Reparations/ Payment to someone who had suffered a loss/victims who suffered from human rights . Compensation violations . Pardon Offer forgiveness for political crimes committed during the apartheid era .
 Amnesty official pardon or forgiveness granted to those guilty of committing political crimes during apartheid era . Reconciliation Bringing together former enemies in a manner that promotes forgiveness and healing . Restorative A form of justice that is about healing and reconciliation (not about punishment or revenge)
 The intention was to help South Africa move into the future as one nation, says President Mandela . Mandela: "I want South Africa to be one nation. South Africa is one of the world's most powerful nations"
 You are required to use the summary in 2.2. above as a base from which you can add more information . Use the summary to help you understand more about the project .
 You will be required to be expected to use theyour apply summary in 2.1to above knowledge the caseas astudies base from which examined you can add more information .
 Various TRC public hearings and subsequent articles will be used as sources of information for this question . Various public hearings, representing various testimonies, will be cited as sources .
 You will be expected to apply your knowledge to the case studies examined . Use this week's Daily Discussion to help students understand each other's work .
 Truth and Reconciliation Commission played in attempting to establish the reasons for the disappearance of anti-apartheid activist Nokuthula Simelane . This source focuses on the role of the commission in trying to establish why the activist was killed .
 Five white men applied for amnesty relating to Nokuthula’s abduction, torture and disappearance . Five men apply for amnesty, including Johannes Coetzee, Anton Pretorius and Frederick Mong .
 At the TRC a former commander of the Soweto Intelligence Unit said that Nokuthula was alive when he last saw her . The unit had turned her into a spy and redeployed her back to Swaziland . The former commander said the unit had been turned into
 Coetzee’s argument was countered by his colleague, Nimrod Veyi, who confessed that she was tortured and brutally murdered and was buried around the Rustenburg area . Nimrod's confession was accepted by the court in South Africa .
 The TRC awarded amnesty to the other four men for torturing her . The other four were also awarded amnesty . The four men were found guilty of torture .
 A life-size statue of Nokuthula was erected and unveiled in Bethal by the Mpumalanga government to honour her legacy and contribution towards the liberation struggle .
 A documentary on the life and disappearance of Simelane, entitled ‘Betrayal, was produced by Mark Kaplan, was televised on SABC 1 on 10 April 2006 . Furthermore, a documentary on his disappearance was also shown on the show .
 Willem Coetzee and Nimrod Veyi’s evidence regarding the disappearance of Nokuthula Simelane contradicted each other . Use the information in the source and your own knowledge to explain why the evidence contradicts each other.
 The end of the Cold war and a new world order 1989 to the present 7.5 years ago was the Cold War era .
 The end of the Cold War and a new world order 1989 to the 7.3.3 . The Cold War was the beginning of the world's new era .
 7.3.2: Balance of power and impact Dominance of global capitalism on Africa . 7.4: Global capitalism is a formative part of the African continent's economic history . The African continent is one of the poorest countries in the world .
 The source below focuses on globalisation and its impact on developing countries . The report focuses on the impact of globalisation on developing nations .
 The article appeared in an article entitled ‘The Negative Effects of Globalisation on South Africa’ and was published on 14 April 2014 .
 Globalisation refers to the integration of economic, political, social and cultural relations among people, companies and governments of different nations and countries . Globalisation is the process of the integration and integration of people and companies .
 It is a process aimed at improving international movement of goods, services, labour and capital .
 This process directly affects the environment, culture, political systems, economic development and prosperity and human physical wellbeing of societies in the world .
 Globalisation supports internationalism and support between countries, as opposed to nationalism and protectionism, which have negative characteristics . Globalisation is a form of internationalism, rather than nationalism, which has negative characteristics, according to experts .
 Over the past 30 years the globalisation of the economy led by the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and transnational entities has happened at a very quick pace . The World Bank has led the development of the world's largest economies .
 Decisions by international organisations ensure that the odds are stacked against nations of the South because of power imbalances . Rules are made to disadvantage poor nations, says the South .
 This has pressured governments of developing countries, such as South Africa, to remove its trade barriers to the cross-border flow of capital and products . South Africa's poultry industry is one example .
 Three ways from the source that suggests that globalisation affected the physical wellbeing of societies in the world . Three ways to explain why globalisation affects physical wellbeing in societies .
 Explain why internationalism was regarded as more successful than nationalism in the context of globalisation . Use the information in the source and your own knowledge to explain why .
 Identify the TWO international monetary institutions that supported the process of globalisation . Identify them as the two institutions that helped the globalisation of the world's largest economies . Identifying the two monetary institutions supporting globalisation is key to understanding the process .
 Explain to what extent various forms of international protests by the Anti-Apartheid Movement activists successfully put pressure on South Africa to end apartheid during the 1970s and 1980s . Explain how the protests helped South Africa end apartheid in South Africa .
 The road to democracy was not an easy or smooth sailing one. Take a stance . Use this article to help students understand the meaning of the Mandela campaign .
 The coming of democracy to South Africa and coming of terms with the past . South Africa's democracy has come to terms with its past . The South African democracy is now a democracy .
 Negotiated settlement and the Government of National unity . 90-1993: ANC and other black political movements were unbanned . 1990-1994: Nelson Mandela released .
 NP allowed the carrying of Zulu ‘Traditional weapons’ Rent, school and consumer boycotts renewed by ANC supporters . ANC supporters renew their boycott of ANC government .
 NP agreed to release political prisoners . IFP attack on ANC stronghold at Sebokeng . NP agrees to release prisoners . ANC stronghold is Sebokang, a stronghold of IFP .
 ANC agreed to suspend armed struggle (An act of ‘good faith’ to show commitment to peaceful negotiation process) NP revoked Separate Reservation of Amenities Act Aug 1990 Pretoria Minute: November 1990: Alleged Third Force attacks on informal at Zonkizizwe
 NP wanted CODESA II replaced by representative of all political parties + minority veto Agreement reached that SABC to present a neutral view of negotiation . ANC wanted an interim govt of no longer than 18 months and simple majority rule. process .
 ANC walked out of negotiation process in response to Boipatong massacre . Rumours spread of white men handing weapons to Third Force agents to spread violence . In response to the massacre ANC walk out of negotiations process .
 CODESA ended, MK disbanded Oct 1992 . NP Government agreed to ban the carrying of traditional weapons in public . Concerned South African Group formed .
 100,000 attended Hani’s funeral st. to be voted for . Date set for 1 democratic election to be held in November . Joe Slovo suggested 5 year Govt of National Unity a ‘power sharing’ compromise – accepted by NP .
 Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging and Volksfront stormed the World Trade Centre 1993 . They vandalised the entrance and threatened the delegates .
 AWB and Constand Viljoen attempted and failed to defend Mangope’s dictatorship in Boputhatswana against huge opposition from students and worker demonstrations . AWB failed to protect Mangope's dictatorship against massive opposition from student demonstrations .
 St James Church Massacre. threw grenade and opened fire in St. James Church Kenilworth. killed, 58 wounded. killed . 58 wounded .
 Refer to the timeline and complete the table under the headings indicated . Planning for the ESSAY begins with the timeline .
 Discuss the extent leadership, compromise and negotiations among various political organisations led to the birth of a democratic South Africa in 1994 .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989 served as a major catalyst for the political transformation that occurred in South Africa . The end of the Cold War and a new world order were the events of 1989 .
 History of South Africa's political landscape between 1989 and 1990 . Use this article to help you understand the events that shaped the political landscape in South Africa between 1989-1990 .
 You need to indicate to what extent you agree with the statement . The events of 1989 include the end of the Cold War and the events of the year 1989 .
 You need to indicate to what extent the collapse of the Soviet Union was largely responsible for the political changes that occurred in South Africa after 1989 after 1989 . The collapse of Soviet Union led to political changes in the country's political landscape .
 You need to take a line of argument and support your response with historical evidence, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In agreeing with the assertion, you could include the following points in their answer . You could also include the fact that you agree with the question .