 Documents released to coincide with 50th anniversary of the moment when the world stood at the precipice of World War III . Fidel Castro's Cuba nearly became a nuclear power after the crisis was thought to have passed .
 In exchange for withdrawing their nuclear missiles from Cuba, the Soviets were promised that the United States would not invade the communist-controlled island nation . The U.S. was promised not to invade Cuba .
 The standoff has been called the most dangerous moment in recorded history . The standoff was called the 'most dangerous moment of recorded history' in history .
 A new timeline of events shows that the crisis did not end with the deal on October 28, 1962 but secretly continued until December . New information shows the crisis actually ended in December .
 The book was written by Sergo Mikoyan, the son of the Soviet official at the center of the story . Archive researcher Svetlana Savranskaya, who completed the work after the author died in 2010 .
 Khrushchev told Kennedy he would remove the “weapons which you call offensive” from Cuba, nuclear warheads capable of reaching U.S. cities as far away .
 Officials in Washington knew about the Luna missiles but wouldn't learn until 1992 that they carried nuclear warheads . Castro fumed as the Soviets removed the long-range missiles .
 Set on keeping the Hiroshima-sized nuclear warheads, he began to chafe at his handlers in Moscow . He was set on keeping Hiroshima-size nuclear warheads .
 Khrushchev dispatched his number two, Soviet Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan, to Havana to calm Castro down . He would learn soon after arriving that his wife of 43 years had died, Mikoyans had little time to grieve .
 Mikoyan initially told Castro he could keep the tactical nukes that had escaped U.S. notice . In sensitive negotiations that would remain secret for decades, the nukes were kept .
 Castro cabled Khrushchev to urge a preemptive nuclear strike on U.S. targets on Oct. 1, 1962 . Khrushchchev called Castro one day before the public crisis would end, but the crisis ended .
 The Cuban leader instructed his U.N. ambassador to tell the world that Cuba possessed tactical nuclear warheads . Weeks later, on Nov. 23, he instructed his United Nations ambassador to say that . Cuba's U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations told the world .
 Soviet official Mikoyan wrote that Castro's orders to shoot at U.S. surveillance planes convinced her that the Cuban tail was capable of wagging the Soviet dog .
 Mikoyan decided on his own that Castro could not be trusted and that the missiles must be removed from the island . He decided to remove the missiles from Cuba .
 "If the Cubans were a little more pliant, and a little less independent, if they were more willing to be Soviet pawns, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island,"" researcher Svetlana Savranskaya .
 Chief Justice John Roberts Confirms Leaked Draft Opinion On Abortion Is Authentic . HPGamGam.push { return HPGam.render; }); .
 "There was an error in processing your submission. Describe the error here." "Your Name" is "Pat Smith"" "Your name was wrong in a recent story..."""Pat Smith was "Pat"