 You must not circulate this work in any other form . You must impose this same condition on any acquirer .
 Kashmir Question, 1947-57, 1947: The Dispute Festers 32 . Kashmir Question: The Kashmir Issue, 1947, 1947 -57 . At the U.N. At the United Nations 28 At the UN Nations 28 The Disputes Festers . At least one Kashmir conflict was
 USSR Approaches to the USA Korean War Japan China 5.5.6.5 . China 5 .
 The United States Alliance Strengthened 64 Benefits of the Alliances 65 Swings of Opinion in the USA and Pakistan 68 7.7. Alliances—Costs and Benefits 60 costs and benefits 60 Costs of the Alliance 60 United States Alliances 60 Benefits of Alliances 64 Sw
 Gwadar Retrocession 81 Indus Waters Treaty, 1960 81 India-China Border War, 1962 83 Pakistan-U.S. Relations Corroded 85 Negotiations on Kashmir, 1962-63 . 87 Changing Strategic Environment 89 Alliance under Strain . 91 Ayub Khan�
 Idealistic in inspiration, the states foreign policy had soon to come to grips, however, with the reality of the challenge to peaceful coexistence .
 Pakistan did what many other states in a similar predicament had done and began to look outwards for friends and allies to support its own efforts to safeguard the independence, strengthen the security and build the economic sinews of the infant state .
 Resistance to hegemony in the regional context complemented Pakistan’s opposition to the Soviet policy of expansionism and subversion . Pakistan was not motivated by Cold War or ideological considerations, as illustrated by its policy to develop friendly cooperation with Peoples Republic of China .
 The failure of the allies to conic to Pakistan's assistance and the powerlessness of the United Nations to restrain India from intervention and aggression in East Pakistan in 1971, convinced Pakistan’s leaders of the need to develop nuclear capability for the purpose of deterrence . The Pakistani leadership pursued with
 FOREWORD xii government and its leaders made fateful decisions . He has delineated the objective strategic considerations on the basis of which the FORewordsord .
 He draws also on personal knowledge as an official in the 1980s when the Geneva Accords were negotiated for the withdrawal of the Soviet forces from Afghanistan . Pakistan decided on a policy reappraisal in the wake of 9/11 .
 The scholarly work he has produced accomplishes his laudable purpose of writing an objective history of Pakistan’s policy . He has produced a laudable work of writing a history of the country's policy .
 I commend Pakistan’s Foreign Policy to students and scholars at home and abroad, as well as members of the security and foreign policy establishment in Pakistan . It will facilitate a deeper understanding of the strategic compulsions that have driven decisionmaking in Pakistan's national security, foreign policy .
 It will also serve to inculcate a sense of history in the younger generation of Pakistanis . Pakistanis will also heighten the consciousness of their national identity .
 Pakistan's foreign policy expert says he has tried to contribute to the transfer of knowledge . Burke wrote the first book on Pakistan’s foreign policy, which was published by Pakistan's Foreign Ministry .
 My assignments at the Foreign Office and in missions abroad provided usefiil opportunities to form perspectives on key foreign policy issues .
 I have put together a plain narrative, faithfully recalling the facts and constraints of the time when the policy decisions had to be made, and their rationale, as far as possible in the words of the policymakers . I have been in touch with the policymaking community for more than a decade .
 This book is not a critique but 1 hope it will provide a factual basis for objective appraisal and help identify lessons useful to future policy makers . It is not only a critique, but it is an objective basis of objective appraisal .
 The chapter on the Shimla conference, with a detailed account of the difficult but purposeful negotiations by able and sophisticated diplomats, will be of particular interest to students of diplomacy .
 The chapter on Post-V/ll policy will provide insights into the process of planning and preparing a realistic policy for optimum results at another crucial juncture in our history . Also, the chapter will also provide insights on the process and preparation of the policy .
 Foreign sources more often quoted foreign sources than our own . Pakistanis often quote foreign sources to reflect their views on U.S. policy .
 The relevant references are available in the released records of foreign governments while ours, if they exist, lie scattered . Even one with official access would find the task of locating the relevant papers as onerous as finding a book in a library without a catalogue .
 The task of a Pakistani researcher suffers from multiple handicaps, perhaps common to developing countries . antiquated secrecy laws are xiv PREface just one of the hurdles .
 Where records do exist, adequate personnel are lacking for sifting and declassification . Where records exist, there are not enough people to sift and declassify them .
 The foreign office has started the exercise but the task is time-consuming . Current issues always take the first claim on the time of senior officials, says the foreign office .
 The oral culture of decision-making makes reconstruction of policy a daunting exercise . It is a daunting task for the government to reconstruct its policies .
 Books written by officials and scholars with access to leaders or their papers provide invaluable material . Sources have been consulted for this book .
 Histories of foreign policy often suffer from a one-dimensional focus on political aspects of relations with foreign countries to the detriment of other determinants . Histories often focus on politics rather than other factors such as economic and political factors .
 Pakistan’s foreign policy has been especially dominated by security and development concerns, and the requirement for foreign military and economic assistance . Pakistan has a long history of relying heavily on foreign military, economic and development assistance .
 Foreign Minister Agha Shahi has read through the entire text of the manuscript, and for his valuable suggestions . I am grateful to Foreign Minister Shahi for reading through the text of this manuscript .
 For me and for two generations of Pakistani diplomats, he has been an icon, dedicated to the service of our nation . For me, and for . two generations, he was an icon . He has been a hero for Pakistan, he said .
 My wife Yasmine, and daughters Simeen and Sarosh, encouraged me over the years to write and to them I dedicate this book with love and affection . I dedicate it to them with love .
 At the time of the 1965 war I was deputy high commissioner in New Delhi, in 1972 I was a member of the Pakistan delegation at the historic Shimla conference .
 I served at the India desk in the ministry of foreign affairs, as ambassador in New Delhi . Later, I served as additional secretary and foreign secretary in Islamabad . I served in India as ambassador and additional secretary .
 For some 13 of his thirty-nine years in the foreign service, I was associated with the conduct of Pakistan’s tortured relations with India . For some thirteen of his 30-year-old foreign service I was . associated with . the conduct . of Pakistan's relations with .
 I mrr national leaders as well as a variety of people in different parts of that vast ard variegated country . I mr. I have a lot of respect for people in the United States .
 I have updated and upgraded the contents of this book . Encouraged by comments of teachers and students of foreign policy of Pakistan .
 "I have substantially re-written the chapters on Terrorism, UN and International Cooperation, and Policy in a Changing World" I have substantially rewritten the chapters of the book .
 Chapters 1 to 19 remain largely as in the first edition though 1 have utilised the opportunity for corrections, additions and improvements . 1 have used the opportunity to make corrections and improvements to the original .
 Several professors have found the book a useful addition to reading material for graduate studies . I an especially gratified that several professors find the book useful .
 Late nineteenth century marked the beginning of a seminal transformation in the political evolution of South Asia with the penetration of modern ideas of nationalism and self-rule . Abdil Sattar Islanabad Chapter 1 The Emergence of Pakistan Historical Background .
 Before then, different parts of the vast geographical region inhabited by indigenous people and settlers of diverse races and religions were ruled by whoever conquered their lands . Until then, the region was ruled by anyone who conquered it .
 Central Asians came from Central Asia and settled in the land . Some came with waves of migrations, others as invaders, others came as invaders .
 His descendant, Asoka , built a great empire that extended from Afghanistan to Kalinga . After his comersion to Buddhism, he spread the new religion throughout the land . His descendant Asoka spread the religion throughout India .
 The Central Asian Kushans ruled the region from Peshawar, as their capital, till the fifth century . Two centuries later, they were supplanted by the Kushans . The Kushans were ruled by the Peshawar-based city of Peshawar from the 5th century .
 Kanishka extended the lealm from Kabul to Kashgar and Kashmir in the north, to Sindh in the south, and the Gangetic plain in the east .
 Gandhara region became a meeting place of Buddhist and Hellenist arts and cultures, leaving a legacy of glorious sculptures . The region is home to a range of ancient artworks and sculptures .
 Gupta Tulers unleashed a Brahminical reaction that wiped out Buddhism from the land of its birth . After the raiding forays of White Huns in the fifth century, the region was conquered by the region .
 Arabs penetrated South Asia via the Indus delta in the eighth century . Arabs penetrated the region via Indus Delta in the 8th century . The Arabs are believed to be the first to enter the region .
 Muhammad Ghori, a Turkic ruler of Ghazni, extended his realm eastwards to Delhi in the late twelfth century . Ghori extended his kingdom eastwards and west to Delhi .
 His successors, Iltutmish and Balban, ruled the northern plains during the thirteenth century . The king ruled the region during the reigns of his successors . His successors ruled the north of the region .
 The Delhi Sultanate was taken over by Khilji and Tughlak dynasties until the end of the fourteenth century . Delhi was ruled by the Sultanate from 14th century onwards .
 Amir Timur marched his army through Afghanistan into Punjab, and plundered and sacked Delhi . He returned to Samarkand in 1399, returning to the city of Samarkan .
 The Sayyids and the Lodhi Afghans subsequently re-established the Delhi Sultanate . The Delhi sultanate was ruled by the Sayyid and Lodhi Afghan .
 Babar led his army from Kabul to supplant the last Lodhi Sultan in 1526 . Babar was the last Sultan of Lodhi to rule the Lodhi kingdom .
 Zaheeruddin Babar, a descendant of Amir Temur, aspired to revive the empire of his fourteenth century ancestor . He was heir to the small fief of Ferghana .
 He captured Samarkand twice but was defeated and driven across the Hindukush to Kabul . He captured the city but was eventually driven out of it . He was driven to Kabul by the Taliban .
 Shah Jehan captured the Delhi Sultanate in 1526 . From his new capital at Agra he extended his realm, laying the foundation of the great Mughal Empire .
 After Aurangzeb the dynasty went into decline in the eighteenth century . The dynasty was known as one of the most powerful in the world .
 Its fall was hastened by European empire-builders who scrambled to pick up the pieces . The fall of the Ottoman Empire was hasten by European empires .
 Britain assumed direct imperial rule after a coalition of the aggrieved local elite tried to wrest power back from the company in the name of the Mughal titular emperor in 1857 .
 The British suppressed the challenge in a savage manner . Calling it mutiny, the British suppressed it in a brutal manner . The British called it 'mutiny'
 Britain assumed the reins of government directly until 1947 . The last Mughal emperor was exiled to Burma and Britain then assumed the throne .
 Central Asian people came with the waves of migrations over the centuries . They mixed with local people and developed a syncretist culture with Persian as the court language . Persian was Persian as court language.
 Immigrant scholars preached the message of Islam and Sufi saints won a cross-religious THE EMERGENCE OF PAKISTAN following by their exemplary piety, noble conduct and service .
 The Muslim rulers did not impose their religion on local inhabitants . They did not exclude local allies from positions in the army and administration .
 After the British took control, Muslims became suspect and were supplanted by loyal non-Muslims . Muslims were also subjected to suppression, exclusion and expropriation . Muslims are now subject to suppression and exclusion .
 "They were further marginalized, because of their refusal to reconcile and adjust to the loss of power," says Nelson Mandela . Mandela: "They are further marginalized because of the failure to reconcile"
 Syed Ahmad Khan, a social reformer and political visionary, discerned the dangers confronting his community, and embarked on a campaign to inspire the Muslim people to abandon the foreign rulers .
 As ideas of self-government and nationalism began to stimulate political thought in the latter part of the nineteenth century, different ethnic and religious communities projected their futures in terms of their interests .
 The Muslim community, comprising a quarter of the population in British India, awoke to its predicament, characterised by economic disparities and social exclusion .
 The idea of nationhood captured the imagination of the Muslim community as its leaders discerned the looming danger of political domination across the religious and social fault line .
 At first they sought legal and constitutional safeguards to secure and ensure an equitable share in social and political institutions . At first, they sought . secure and . ensure the equitable share of social . institutions, they say .
 The rift began to widen after the founding of the Indian National Congress in 1886 . Allan Octavian Hume, a British ex-official, was its first secretary general for two decades .
 Congress attracted few Muslims as their leaders advised them to keep aloof from this nominally secular party that sought to supplant the British in positions of power and influence . Dominated by the Hindu elite, the Congress was dominated by Hindu Hindus .
 The Muslim League was established in 1906 to protect and promote the rights of the Muslim community . Its leaders with modern education and political vision established the Muslim League .
 Congress opposed a proposal for separate electorates that would ensure representation for Muslims in the government . The issues were joined in 1909 when the Congress opposed the proposal . The issue was joined by the Congress in 1909 .
 The two communities clashed over the British governments decision in 1905 to create the new province of East Bengal and Assam . The province brought some relief to the Muslim majority from the domination and exploitation by West Bengal .
 The Muslim League successfully pressured the British government to annul the division in 1911 . To the consternation of the Muslim League, the Congress pressured the government .
 The League proposed, and Congress opposed, safeguards for Muslims . More enduring, and in the end insoluble, were constitutional issues, as the League proposed .
 Jinnah successfully promoted a compromise package for the future constitution . Jinnah was a brilliant barrister with impeccable anticolonial credentials . He successfully promoted the compromise package .
 Lucknow Pact included separate electorates, provincial autonomy, a one-third share for Muslims in the central assembly . The pact was approved by both the Congress and the League in 1916 .
 The Indian National Congress went back on its commitment in 1928, when it adopted the Motilal Nehru Report . The report recommended replacement of separate electorates with a joint electorate and curtailment of provincial autonomy .
 During the second stage, the League’s emphasis was on constitutional safeguards for Muslims in provinces where they were a minority . The League's emphasis is on constitutional protections for Muslims .
 As political thought progressed, they sought autonomy for Muslim-majority provinces . They then raised their sights to an independent state . They sought autonomy in Muslim provinces before seeking independence .
 Congress exploited its triumph by excluding League members from participation in governments in the provinces . The Congress adopted symbols of the Hindu raj and promoted the replacement of Urdu with Hindi .
 Muslim leaders realized the consequences of disunity and factional politics before the election . Muslim leaders now closed ranks under Jinnahs leadership .
 Muslims galvanized Muslims by laying before them a lucid vision of political salvation . He galvanized them by laying out a lucid political vision, he says .
 Eminent Muslims and the Muslim media began to call him Quaid-iAzam, Great Leader . He was the leader of Pakistan's first nation .
 The Congress demanded transfer of power, claiming the right of succession as the largest political party . The Congress claimed the right to transfer power to the largest party .
 The Muslim League reiterated its ‘divide-and-quit’ demand, asking the British to first agree to the creation of Pakistan in regions where Muslims constituted a majority . The British agreed to create Pakistan in areas where Muslims were a majority, the Muslim League said .
 In 1946, the British Cabinet Mission proposed a constitutional plan based on the division of British India into three autonomous zones . The powers of the centre to be limited to foreign affairs, defence and communications .
 After hectic consultations and negotiations, it was accepted by the leaders of the Muslim League as well as the Indian National Congress, and announced on 3 June 1947 . The Muslim League accepted the proposal, and it was later accepted by both parties .
 Pakistan was established through the exercise of self-determination by the people of the Muslim-majority provinces and parts of provinces of the British Indian Empire, either in popular referenda or by the votes of the elected representatives of the people . The agreement was reached in 1947 .
 Congress agreed to the partition, but some of its leaders projected the economic collapse of Pakistan . Congress grudgingly agreed to partition, and some leaders projected economic collapse .
 No one epitomized the contradictions in the Congress more strikingly than its spiritual leader Mahatma Gandhi . Gandhi was the spiritual leader of the Congress . Gandhi's life was punctuated by the contradictions of the party .
 This led to the massacre of hundreds of thousands of innocent people and the exodus of some fifteen million people who moved from the country of their residence to seek refuge in the other . The massacre of some 15 million people led to an exodus of around 15 million .
 Further worsening of relations, and the perpetuation of tension, was owed, in particular, to the failure to resolve the disputes that arose after Independence . Further worsening was due to the lack of resolution of the disputes after Independence, he says .
 The 3rd June Plan gave only seventy-two days for transition to independence . The plan was meant to allow independence from Pakistan . The Pakistanis were given only two months to prepare for independence .
 Three provinces had to be divided, referenda organized in North-West Frontier Province and Sylhet division of Assam . Civil and armed services personnel were given the opportunity to decide which country they would serve .
 Pakistan inherited neither a capital with a functioning secretariat nor the resources to establish and equip the new state . The telescoped timetable prepared at the behest of Governor General Mountbatten seemed tailor-made for Pakistan .
 In his address to the annual session of the Muslim League at Allahabad, 1930, Iqbal said, 'I would like to see the Punjab' In his speech, he said he wanted to see Punjab as a state of Pakistan .
 The Muslim League first used the title in 1937 . admiring Muslims and media called him by this honorific earlier .
 Sharif Al Mujahid, Quaid-i-Azam linnah, was born in Karachi, Karachi, 1981, 41 . He was killed in a car bomb blast at the age of 41 .
 The signatories of the pamphlet Now or Never were Mohammad Aslam Khattak, President Khyber Union, Choudhury Rabmat Ali, Inayatullah Khan (of Charsadda), and Sheikh Mohammad Sadiq of Mongrol, Kathiawar .
 Pakistan was formed by combining P for the Punjab, A for Afghanis, K for Kashmir, S for Sindh and TAN for Baluchistan . They conceived the name Pakistan by combining the word P for Punjab and A for the Afghanis .
 Pakistan emerged onto the world stage on 14 August 1947, after a two-pronged struggle . First, for independence from colonial rule, and second, for freedom for the people of Muslim-majority areas .
 Neither British nostalgia for maintaining the unity of the 'Jewel in the Crown' nor the ambition of the Indian National Congress to step into the shoes of the departing colonial power, conformed to the imperatives of the dawning era of self-determination and self-rule .
 The Muslim League had to wage a long, and at times bitter, political battle . The issue was ultimately resolved through agreement through agreement .
 The British and the Congress leaders conceded the Leagues demand for the creation of two independent states to succeed the Indian Empire . The Leagues demanded for creation of independent states .
 Pakistan came into existence through the explicit exercise of the right of self-determination . Pakistan is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 Muslims in Muslimmajority parts of British India voted directly in referenda or through their elected representatives to join the new state . Muslims in the Muslim majority voted directly or indirectly to join British India .
 The foreign policy of Pakistan was to be moulded in the crucible of interaction with its neighbour India . Pakistan's foreign policy was imbued from the start with the idealistic vision of the state’s founding fathers .
 Quaid-iAzam 2: Mohammad Ali Jinnah was the first head of the new state . Jinnah committed to the principles of peace with faith and confidence in human capacity to resolve differences .
 Liaquat Ali Khan was secretary general of the Muslim League in the 1930s and first prime minister of Pakistan . Another exemplar of the former prime minister was Liaquatsat Khan, a barrister who became secretary general .
 Jinnah believed that Pakistan should be a progressive, democratic polity founded on Islamic principles of social welfare, religious tolerance and the equal rights of all citizens . He believed, like Jinnah, that Pakistan was a progressive and democratic country .
 The nations mentors were dedicated, practical men, with implicit faith in the Muslim community’s capacity to end stagnation and build a better future . They were dedicated and practical men .
 Syed Ahmad Khan believed in the acquisition of ‘education in its modern sense’ to promote ‘equal and proportionate progress’ for all people .
 Mohammad Iqbal rejected the concept of predestination and advocated constant human striving to shape a better destiny for mankind . Iqabal was a humanist scholar with profound insights into Islamic as well as western history .
 His inspiring poetry, widely read in the early twentieth century, sought to inculcate the spirit of dynamism in society . The poet was widely read by the early 20th century .
 We believe in the principle of honesty and fair play in national and international dealings . We are prepared to make the utmost contribution to the promotion of peace and prosperity among the world .
 Pakistan will never be found lacking in extending its material and moral support to the oppressed and suppressed people of the world . Pakistan is committed to upholding the principles of the United Nations Charter, says PM .
 During the Second World War the Muslim League decided, under his leadership, to support the Allies against the Fascist powers . The Muslim League supported the Allies in the war .
 The Soviet Union’s record of rapid economic progress and its foreign policy of opposition to colonialism and imperialism impressed all educated people, says the author of the book . ‘The Soviet Union was a model of democracy for democracy and freedom of expression,’ he says .
 The Soviet system, however, was unattractive to League leaders because of its restrictions on freedom, atheist ideology and sponsorship of subversion in other countries . League leaders were unhappy with the Soviet system because it was not free .
 Pakistan was at first averse to becoming involved in the ideological contest between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Pakistan was initially reluctant to join the ideological struggle between the two blocs .
 The Quaid did not allow the political conflict of the pre-Independence period to cloud his vision . Preoccupied with developments in South Asia, the Quaid was pre-independence .
 He transcended the bitter legacy and looked with hope and anticipation to future relations with Britain and India . But he transcended his bitter legacy .
 11 Pakistani leaders hoped that law and reason would govern relations between Pakistan and India . Pakistan achieved Pakistan ‘peacefully by moral and intellectual force ’ 11 leaders .
 Jinnah expressed the hope that both countries would adhere to the principles of equity and justice, and build peaceful and cooperative relations to the mutual benefit of their people .
 It is of vital importance to Pakistan and India as Independent, sovereign states to collaborate in a friendly way to jointly defend their frontiers, both on land and sea against any aggression .
 This defiends entirely on whether India and Pakistan can resolve their own differences . But this is entirely dependent on whether they can do so in the future .
 "If we put own house in order internally, then we may be able to play a very great part externally in all international affairs," he says . If we put ourselves in order, we could play a great part in international affairs .
 Jinnah hoped that Pakistan and Afghanistan would soon ‘secure and strengthen’ the goodwill and friendship between the two fraternal nations . Kabul’s challenge to the boundary agreement was signed with the British Indian government as far back as 1893 .
 Pakistan's interests are best served by upholding the universally recognized principles of international law codified in the Charter of the United Nations . Enduring Relevance of Principles is a timeless value, says Pakistan's prime minister .
 A state too has to seek its destiny in cooperation with the world community, he says . Their observance by all states, large or small, more or less powerful, is indispensable for the preservation of international peace, he writes .
 The successes as well as the failures of our foreign policy can be traced to whether or not it earned the nation a place of respect in the international mainstream . The successes and failures of foreign policy are traced to the nation's place in the global mainstream .
 A policy that leads to isolation is inimical to the interests of middle and small powers, says the Foreign Office . A policy of isolation is 'inimical' to the interest of small powers .
 Friendship between states, as between individuals, is dependent on reciprocity, mutual goodwill, and respect for equity and justice . Friendship between nations is dependent upon reciprocity and mutual goodwill .
 It cannot be promoted by attempts on the part of one to dominate or impose unilateral preference on the other, says the BBC .
 The UN Charter calls for peaceful settlement of disputes consistent with the principles of justice and international law . The UN charter calls for peace consistent with principles of peace and justice .
 Quaid reiterated that principle in offering friendship and collaboration with India . The Quaid said the Quaid offered friendship and cooperation in India .
 Quaid-iAzam: Human rights, the states responsibility towards citizens, and the obligation of citizens to be loyal to their state . In the catalogue of enduring principles, it is necessary also to mention his views on human rights and the responsibility of the state .
 The nation henceforth was all the people of Pakistan, irrespective of their religion, says President Hussain . Hussain: The nation of Pakistan was now a nation of all people, regardless of their faith .
 Jinnah was consistent in giving the same message to Muslims who remained in India . Characteristically, Jinnah gave the message to the Muslims who stayed in India.
 Four months later, at the last session of the Muslim League as its leader, he endorsed the bifurcation of the party . Four months after he was leader he endorsed a bifurocation of his party .
 Muslims of India would no longer be guided from any source outside and they would aspire to equal rights and obligations as loyal citizens of India . Muslims would aspire for equal rights as loyal citizen of India, says the PM .
 Jinnah gave Muslims of minority provinces the credit for the establishment of Pakistan . Jinnah told the session, ‘Pakistan is going to be a Muslim State based on Islamic ideals'
 Jinnah's vision of human rights anticipated the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . Jinnah’s vision anticipated the U.N. Human Rights. Jinnah was assassinated in 1941 .
 Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status .
 From the very beginning Pakistan’s foreign policy upheld the fundamental principles of international law, especially respect for independence, non-aggression and non-interference in internal affairs as an indispensable condition .
 It extended goodwill towards all states and support for the legitimate causes of FOREIGN POLICY-BEGINNINGS 17 peoples, the cherishing of fraternal bonds with other Muslim nations and the desire for cooperation .
 Jinnah urged such a course, but the transition from checkered past to a beckoning future could not be achieved by Pakistan alone . Jinnah: Pakistan's transition to a new era of prosperity is not only possible, but it is also possible to achieve it .
 The civil administration and armed forces of British India were still in the process of division and resources were meagre as India delayed or withheld Pakistan's share of financial and other assets .
 Complex partition problems were compounded by the unfair boundary award and the un-anticipated tide of millions of refugees fleeing communal riots of unprecedented magnitude . Complex partition issues were compounded with the uneven boundary award .
 Relations between the two countries got off to an inauspicious start . Tensions mounted as unforeseen disputes darkened the South Asian horizon . Relations began to deteriorate in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Agreement on division of assets and liabilities of British India provided for a 17. per cent share for Pakistan . Agreement on the division of the assets  provided for 17 per cent of Pakistan's share . India stalled implementation of the agreement .
 Of Pakistan’s share of 165,000 tons of defence stores, India had transferred only 4,730 tons by 31 March 1948 . Of the other assets, India ‘dishonestly retained much of Pakistan's share’
 Pakistan promptly transferred ninety fighter aircraft that were India’s share . In contrast, India transferred 90 fighter aircraft to Pakistan .
 It was expected to be just and impartial. While it could also take into account ‘other factors’
 He was now indebted to Nehru for retaining him as governor general of independent India . He now owes Nehru to keep him in India .
 The unjust boundary award was announced on 17 August, three days after Pakistan's independence . The unjust award added fuel to the raging fire of communal violence .
 Despite calls for the maintenance of peace by Jinnah and Gandhi, communal riots escalated as the partition was being effected . The riots occurred during the partition of India .
 The policy of the rulers of the princely states of Patiala and Kapurthala was particularly virulent . Although acts of savagery took place on both sides, the policy was virulent, says historian .
 In a matter of weeks they liquidated the Muslim population of some 700,000 . The Muslim population was liquidated by the government .
 Armed men have been sent to Jammu and Kashmir to assist the Dogra forces of this state in unleashing terror . They also sent armed men to assist Jammu & Kashmir forces . The Dogra has also been fighting in Kashmir .
 It claimed ‘seigniorage’ charges for the water flowing to Pakistan . Ignoring principles of international law governing international rivers, it said .
 Pakistan submitted under duress . Facing the ruin of agriculture in the affected areas, Pakistan submitted . Pakistan submitted to the government under duression .
 Tension between Pakistan and India built up as disputes between the two countries multiplied . Tensions between the countries have been high in recent years . Tension has been building up as the two nations engage in disputes .
 Pakistan sought resolution on the basis of law and equity, willing to accept impartial settlement . Pakistan sought their resolution on . the basis . of law, equity and law .
 India, however, was intent from the start to impose its unilateral preferences . India was intent on imposing its unilateral preference for the region .
 The divergence was aggravated by India’s primordial inclination as a more powerful state to exploit power disparity to its advantage . The divergence has been aggravated by the fact that India is more powerful than India .
 Islamic civilization contributed to unprecedented advances in all fields of human endeavour . It achieved glorious heights in arts and architecture, and extending frontiers of knowledge in philosophy and history .
 Expanding across continents of Asia and Africa, it established its sway also in parts of Europe, and contributed to its renaissance .
 Following the devastating invasions of the Mongols, the Muslim power declined and by the eighteenth century European empires colonized large parts of its former territories .
 The Muslim League followed a policy of solidarity with other Muslim nations . During its own freedom struggle, the Muslim League supported other Muslim countries . The League was formed during the Arab Spring .
 He advocated the cause of the Khilafat as the custodian of the holy places of Islam . He was a member of the Muslim community .
 Kemal Ataturk’s heroic role in defending the Turkish homeland inspired the Muslim people in South Asia . Kemal ataturk was a hero for the Turkish people, who fought for Turkey .
 Another issue that distressed the Muslim community was the injustice perpetrated on the people of Palestine . The Muslim community is distressed by the injustices perpetrated on Palestine, he said .
 Pakistan raised its voice in support of independence of Indonesia, Libya, Morocco, Sudan, Tunisia, and other former colonies . At the U.N. and other forums, Pakistan has voiced its support for independence of former colonies.
 Spokesmen of some of these nations were given Pakistani passports to travel internationally to solicit the world community’s support for their freedom struggle . Some of these countries were given passports to solicit world support .
 Pakistan’s policy towards the Muslim world was motivated by an earnest desire for close cooperation in all fields in the belief it would accelerate the process of economic development and social reconstruction . Pakistan's policy towards Muslim world is motivated by a desire to close cooperation, says PM .
 Its leaders advocated collaboration in fields of science and technology, which was the key to progress in all fields . The U.S. Senate will hold a hearing in New York City on Thursday .
 Pakistan considered pooling resources in order to strengthen mutual security . Pakistan even contemplated pooling of resources to strengthen security .
 Upon independence, Pakistan developed close relations with most Muslim countries, especially Iran and Turkey . Pakistan has developed close ties with Iran, Turkey and Turkey since independence .
 Shahanshah was the first head of state to visit Pakistan . He was given a memorable welcome by enthusiastic crowds . The Shahanah visited Pakistan and was greeted by crowds .
 Turkey aware of the history of support by South Asia Muslims and their admiration of Kemal Ataturk, responded with cordiality . Turkey, aware of their history, responded to the request with a friendly response .
 Saudi Arabia wished 'the new Muslim State great prosperity and progress’ and ever since has remained a fraternal friend and constant supporter . Saudi Arabia, the cradle of Islam, wished 'The new Muslim state great prosperity'
 Pakistan’s championship of the Palestinian cause evoked appreciation in the Arab world . Pakistan has won a championship of Palestinian cause in recent years .
 Pakistan hosted a number of conferences of representatives of Muslim peoples to deliberate on issues of common concern . Pakistan has hosted a series of conferences with representatives from Muslim peoples .
 Differences in policies emerged with the rise of Arab nationalism that emphasized the Arab bond virtually to the exclusion of non-Arab Muslim States . The Arab bond was virtually to be almost entirely ignored by non-Muslim countries .
 Egypt leaned towards the Soviet Union for support against the UK and USA . Pakistan’s security imperatives drove it into alliance with those powers . Egypt leaned to Soviet Union in the 1980s for support .
 The Baghdad Pact provoked strong Arab denunciation on the additional ground that Iraq’s membership was divisive of Arab unity . The Baghdad pact provoked strong denunciation from Arab nations .
 Pakistan’s role at the first FOREIGN . POLICY-BEGINNINGS 21 London conference on the Suez crisis further antagonized Arab sentiment against Pakistan . Pakistan's role at first .
 Afghan government questions validity of Durand Line boundary with Pakistan . Afghan government is questioning the validity of the Durand line . British rule over India drew to close as British rule ended .
 Apparently the Afghan advocates of the irredenta were misled by Indian National Congress politicians . They wishfully believed Pakistan was economically unviable .
 Abdul Ghaffar Khan, an old and respected veteran of the anti-colonial struggle who sadly failed to keep pace with the sweeping political evolution in the 1940s . They were encouraged by the pro-Congress Red Shirts party in NWFP, led by Abdul Khan, who died in
 The Durand boundary agreement of 1893 was negotiated at the initiative of Amir Abdur Rahman of Afghanistan, who expressed full satisfaction with the agreement . The agreement was reiterated in the treaty of 1905 .
 In 1919 and 1921, the government of Afghanistan reconfirmed acceptance of the boundary . Amir Amanullah Khan, reputed for his assertion of independence, was reputed to have asserted independence in Afghanistan .
 Commonalties of ethnicity, language and culture are a common feature of most international boundaries . As for the nature of the boundary, commonalties are of ethnicity and culture .
 The 'plight' of people on either side could not be said to be much better or worse than on the other . Nor could the ‘plight’ of people in either way be better or better than the other, they say .
 Afghan representative to the United Nations cast the solitary negative vote when Pakistan was admitted to the organization on 30 September 1947 . Explaining that Pakistan’s boundary with Afghanistan was disputed, the Afghan representative said .
 Three weeks later, the delegation of Afghanistan withdrew the negative vote . Three weeks after the vote, Afghanistan withdrew a negative vote from the delegation .
 The Sindh assembly and representatives of Muslim-majority districts in Bengal and Punjab assemblies voted to join Pakistan . Representatives from Muslim-dominated districts of Bengal, Punjab and Sindh assemblies voted for Pakistan .
 In Balochistan, a Shahi Jirga and members of the Quetta municipality decided unanimously to join Pakistan . The decision was made unanimously by members of a local council in Quetta .
 Tribal jirgas declared in meetings held by Governor Cunningham, and confirmed in writing, that they were part of Pakistan . Tribal councils have declared in writing that they are now part of the country .
 Ijtikad in modern times could be entrusted to elected members of parliament . AUama Mohammed Iqbal’s Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam was key to his ideas on reformation .
 Choudhury, Pakistan’s Relations with India, 1947-1966, Pall Mall Press, London. 67.67.67 .
 Fazilka Headworks controlled canals on the Sutlej, which irrigated lands on the Pakistan side . Others included Ferozepur, Zira and Zira, which had a Muslim majority . Headworks were controlled by canals that controlled canalways on the
 The British Indian Independence Act of 1947 affirmed the lapse of British suzerainty over the states . British Indian independence Act was passed in 1947 . The Act affirms the loss of British Indian sovereignty .
 The rulers of some of the larger ones nourished ambitions to independence . But they did not receive much support from the rulers of many larger ones .
 The Indian National Congress had insisted on the partition of the provinces of Assam, Bengal and Punjab . On the basis of this principle, the Congress had demanded the partition .
 All the princely states except Hyderabad, Jammu and Kashmir and Junagadh followed the principle of partition and acceded to India or Pakistan . Hyderabad was one of the most populous states in India and Pakistan .
 The Nizam of Hyderabad aspired to independence, but his state was invaded and occupied by India in 1948 . Hyderabad was invaded by India and became part of the Hyderabad region .
 The Indian government committed an ‘utter violation’ of the principles on which partition was based’ when it accepted the offer of accession by the Dogra-Hindu Maharaja of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, even though 77 per cent of its four million people
 The Maharajas decision to accede to India followed events that testify to a pre-conceived design . The Maharaja's decision to accept India's sovereignty was made by the Maharaja of India .
 After the meeting, the maharaja appointed a chief minister who openly advocated accession to India . The chief minister was appointed by the Maharaja and openly advocated for accession .
 Mountbatten connived in the Indian design on Kashmir by influencing Sir Cyril Radcliff, the supposedly impartial chairman of the Punjab Boundary Commission, to award two Muslim-majority tehsils of Gurdaspur district to India .
 Maharaja Hari Singh was notorious for his oppressive rule of Jammu and Kashmir . He ruled the state of Kashmir and Kashmir for over 30 years .
 He incarcerated prominent leaders of the two major political parties, the All Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference, and the National Conference, a secularist ally of the Indian National Congress, in Kashmir .
 The Muslim Conference adopted a resolution in July 1947 in favour of accession to Pakistan . Pakistan became the first country to join the Muslim Conference in 1947 .
 Majority opinion was also said to be of the same view, but it was decided to postpone a decision until its leader, Sheikh Abdullah, could be consulted . Majority opinion, even in the National Conference, was .
 Pakistan’s independence day was enthusiastically celebrated in Srinagar with flags . Pakistan's independence day is celebrated in Kashmir with flags in the city .
 The maharaja ordered the flags tom down and closed down all pro-Pakistan newspapers . He ordered the flag down and the newspapers closed down .
 First, he delayed the decision on accession and offered to sign a ‘standstill’ agreement with Pakistan and India . Then, he offered to make a standstill agreement with the two countries .
 On 17 August, Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan and his companions declared a revolt . The revolt took place in Poonch and Mirpur, and on 17 August .
 60,000 ex-soldiers who had served in the British army during the Second World War joined the revolt . Soon, they had joined up with the revolt against the British government .
 In September, a freedom movement was launched by Sardar Mohammad Ibrahim Khan . Khan launched in September . Khan's freedom movement is based in Pakistan .
 The Azad government of Jammu and Kashmir was established in the liberated territory . It later established a government of Azad in the region .
 Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah was released from jail on 29 September in response to Nehru's repeated demand . The maharaja was in pursuit of his design .
 The maharaja’s forces embarked on a campaign of massacres and mass evictions, evidently designed to reduce the Muslim majority in the state . Meanwhile, the maharajas have embarked on the campaign of massacre and evictions .
 More than half a million people were driven out across the border towards Pakistan . More than 500,000 were driven across border to Pakistan in 2009 .
 In Jammu province, where Muslims were 61 per cent of the population, 200,000 Muslims were exterminated . In some of the districts districts the majority was reduced to a minority .
 The Government of Pakistan sent strong protests to the maharaja but with little effect . The government of Pakistan has sent a strong protest to the Maharaja .
 Afridi and Mahsud tribesmen from Tirah and Waziristan formed a Ioshkar and entered Kashmir on 22 October . They were formed to save Kashmiri brethren from extermination .
 A number of Christian missionaries were killed in Baramula . Although they made short shrift of the state forces, they unfortunately displayed poor discipline .
 By 26 October they were on the outskirts of Srinagar but were diverted by looting by looting . By that time they had reached outskirts of the city, they had been on their way to Kashmir . They had been diverted to the city's outskirts by looting, but were unable to reach
 The Indian Defence Committee had' already met on 25 October and decided to rush arms aid to Kashmir . The Indian defence committee had already met and decided on the aid .
 On Governor General Mountbatten’s advice it decided to first secure the state's accession . The state decided to secure the accession to the UK from Russia .
 Menon flew to Kashmir and claimed to have obtained the signatures of the maharaja on the document . Menon claims he got the signatures on 26 October from Kashmir's maharajas .
 The maharaja set up an interim government and asked Sheikh Abdullah to join the state prime minister to carry out the responsibilities . At the same time, Sheikh Abdullah set up the interim government . Sheikh Abdullah is the current state premier of Punjab .
 Pakistan lacked military strength to counter the Indian use of force, as India withheld the transfer of Pakistan’s entire share of the ordnance . Pakistan lacked the strength to respond to the use of Indian forces .
 Kashmir should be given accession in accordance with the wishes of the people of that state, says Kashmir leader . Kashmir has been ruled out of Kashmir by the Indian government since 1999 .
 I should like to make it clear that the question of aiding Kashmir in this emergency is not designed in any way to influence the state to accede to India . I should also say that the aid is not intended to influence Kashmir to accept India's sovereignty .
 Pakistan did not give credit to the hypocritical proviso or Nehru’s assurance . The circumstances clearly pointed to a preconceived design and the Pakistan government did not .
 Quaid-i-Azam ordered General Gracey, the acting commander-in-chief of the Pakistan army, to send troops to counter the Indian attack, but he demurred and instead sought instructions from the Supreme Commander, Field Marshal Auchinleck, in New Delhi .
 Muslim Conference leaders Ghulam Abbas and Mirwaiz Mohammad Yusuf remain in detention . Meanwhile, the Muslim Conference was silenced and its leaders remained in detention.
 Gilgit Scouts ousted the maharajas governor, who had been appointed after the British governments lease of the territory expired on 15 August . The people of Gilgit were outraged by the decision .
 At the request of the Scouts, Pakistan took over the administration of the agency . Pakistan has been taking over the agency from the Scouts .
 On 21 November Nehru replied it was not dear to him what the UN could do . Nehru: "It is not dear, he said. It's not dear what the United could do" Nehru said on 21 November
 Indian forces met with stiff resistance by the people as they proceeded to occupy the state and drive out Kashmiris . Meanwhile, the Indian forces were met with a stiff resistance .
 At the United Nations On 1 January 1948, India filed a complaint with the Security Council against Pakistan, under Artide 35 of Chapter VI of the Charter . India asked the Council to call upon Pakistan to stop giving assistance to the invaders .
 The Dominion Government made it clear that once the soil of the State had been cleared of the invader and normal conditions were restored, the people would be free to decide their future by the democratic method of plebiscite or referendum .
 The Security Council started consideration of the question on 15 January . Security Council has been considering the issue since then .
 By then Pakistan had also hied a counter-complaint, charging India with genocide and refuting the validity of the maharajas accession . Pakistan also refuted India's accession, saying India's claim was invalid .
 Pakistan requested the Security Council to call upon India to desist from acts of aggression, and appoint a commission to investigate its charges against India . Pakistan requested a commission be appointed to investigate Pakistan's charges .
 Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan spoke for five hours during the Security Council debate . Khan was speaking for more than five hours .
 Security Council established UN Commission for India and Pakistan in 1948 . UN Commission was established to investigate facts and exercise mediatory influence . Security Council decided on 20 January 1948 to establish the commission .
 The Commission visited Pakistan and India . Comprising selected members of the Council, the Commission visited both countries .
 On its recommendation, the Council adopted the first substantive resolution on 21 April 1948 . The Council adopted a substantive resolution in 1948 .
 The Security Council’s call to both sides to refrain from any action that might aggravate the situation was ignored . India embarked on a 30 PAKISTAN'S FOREIGN POLICY large-scale offensive in the spring .
 General Gracey then submitted to the Government of Pakistan his appreciation that the operation would lead to another serious influx of refugees from Kashmir into Pakistan . He recommended that the Indian advance needed to be stopped .
 The Government of Pakistan decided to send limited forces to hold defensive positions in the state .
 Three brigades were sent to reinforce the defence lines held in Azad Kashmir in May . Pakistan could not sit back passively unmindful of the danger of an Indian invasion of Pakistan territory .
 UNCIP adopted an elaborate three-part resolution providing for a ceasefire order by India and Pakistan, a truce agreement and a plebiscite . The resolution was adopted on August 13, 1948 .
 Pakistan was to withdraw its troops as their presence in Jammu and Kashmir ‘constitutes a material change in the situation’ and territory vacated by them would be administered by the local authority under the surveillance of the commission .
 The future status of the Slate of Jammu and Kashmir shall be determined in accordance with the will of the people . India and Pakistan agree to enter into consultations with the Commission to determine fair and equitable conditions .
 UNCIP adopted another resolution incorporating supplementary principles accepted by India and Pakistan about a truce . The appointment of a plebiscite administrator was made following the entry into force of the ceasefire in 1949 .
 Although the British role in the Security Council was pro-India, most members brought an impartial and salutary approach to deliberations on the Kashmir Question rooted in the norms of international law, in order to promote a solution .
 Some of the key members of the Security Council later adopted stilted positions on the basis of selfinterest rather than the merits of the dispute . India exploited the Cold War to gain the support of the Soviet Union by using or threatening the use of the USSR veto .
 India set about consolidating its control over the rest of the state . India has occupied the bulk of the Indian-held state .
 At the same time India also began attempts to wriggle out of its solemn pledges and commitments to the people of Kashmir, Pakistan and the U.N. At the time, India also tried to .
 It alleged non-compliance by Pakistan with one part of the Security Council resolutions or another regarding arrangements for a plebiscite . Pakistan rejected proposals by UN mediators for impartial arbitration on differences of interpretation .
 A suggestion by the United States State Department, urging flexibility on legal points, drew a rigid and rude response from Nehru . Nehru: A suggestion that the U.S. State Department should allow flexibility in its approach to the law was a rigid response .
 UNIP replaced UNCIP with a Representative to assist the two countries towards demilitarisation . UNCIP was replaced by a Representative in March 1950 . UNIP was established in 1950 to help the two nations demilitarily disarmament .
 The first Representative, Judge Owen Dixon of Australia, discussed arrangements for the plebiscite . India refused to concede temporary authority to UN Administrator .
 Dixon came to the conclusion that India’s agreement ‘would never be obtained to demilitarization’ in any form as would permit the plebiscite to be conducted in conditions sufficiently guarded against intimidation and other forms of influence and abuse .
 Nehru indicated interest, calculating that Abdullah could manipulate the plebiscite . Nehru showed interest in Abdullah, who was in control of the vote . Abdullah was the prime minister of India .
 The Security Council then appointed Frank P Graham as its Representative . Graham was appointed as the Security Council's representative . Graham is a former member of the Council of Representatives .
 He took up the question as to the number and character of forces to be retained by India and Pakistan consistent with the holding of a free plebiscite .
 Graham proposed that Pakistan should reduce the forces on its side to between 3,000 and 6,000, and India to between 12,000 to 18,000 . In his report of 23 December 1952, Graham suggested that Pakistan reduce its forces to 3,500 . Graham: Pakistan should
 Graham continued his efforts and made five more reports during his tenure until 1958, but with no result . Graham continued to make five more attempts to find out what had happened .
 In June 1953, Prime Minister Mohammad Ali Bogra opened a dialogue with Nehru in the hope of settling differences bilaterally . Bogra and Nehru were prime ministers of India .
 Kashmiri people have the right to determine the future of their state . He did not care o explain what the connection was between such a pact and the right if the Kashmiris to determine their future .
 People of the tate cursed him for selling out their interests and allowing himself to be used as an instrument in the Indian design .
 When the United States began consideration of a defence pact with ‘akistan in 1953, India came up with another specious argument to enege on its commitments on Kashmir .
 It declared that such rrangcmcnis would constitute ‘a qualitative change of circumstances’ elating to the Kashmir question . It declared such a change would ‘contribute to a qualitative change’
 Pakistan’s alliance with >ther countries could neither absolve India of its obligations under JN resolutions nor prejudice the recognised right of self-determination if the people of Kashmir . Of course, Pakistan's alliance with . India could not absolve itself of its . obligations under . J
 India's argument that Pakistan’s defence pact with the U.S. epresented 'change of circumstances’ releasing India from its bligation under the UN resolutions was totally inadmissible in law nd logic .
 Bad faith was also writ large on India's plea that a decision y Kashmiris in favour of Pakistan would prejudice India’s secular haracter and political unity . Bad faith also was also shown on the Indian side .
 At first the USSR abstained but later it threw its powerful weight behind India . The USSR later endorsed the Indian position on Kashmir . At first it abstained and later threw its weight behind the India .
 The Security Council was prevented from dealing with the Kashmir question impartially or to act with determination to secure implementation of its own resolutions . The Council was henceforth prevented from . dealing with Kashmir issue impartially .
 One after another obstacle has been raised by India to prevent a settlement of the Kashmir question . India has raised another obstacle to prevent settlement of Kashmir question, says Indian diplomat .
 All that it required is the implementation of the pledge in the UN resolutions, accepted by India as well as Pakistan, and to let the people of the state decide the question of accession in a free plebiscite .
 India’s claim that the maharaja of Kashmir had the right to decide the question of accession is not congruent either with its stance in respect of Junagadh and Hyderabad, the conditional acceptance of the mahaja's accession, the pledges of Jaw
 India’s argument that implementation of the UN resolutions was subject to the condition of withdrawal of Pakistani troops ignores the record of negotiations . Similarly, India's subsequent argument that . implementation of UN resolutions . was . subject to a condition of . withdrawal of Pakistan troops ignores record of . negotiations
 Pakistan was prepared to reduce its forces to the bare minimum but India refused the UN THE KASHMIR QUESTION . 1947-57 35 mediator’s suggestion that the Kashmiri people should exercise their right of self-determination without fear of duress .
 British foreign secretary, Ernest Bevin, expressed regret that a warlike spirit has developed’ in India . Bevin: ‘Warlike spirit’ has developed in the country .
 Nehru's assertion that the maharaja wished to join India either evidenced a preconceived conspiracy or a deliberate lie . Nehru’s assertion was either a pre-planned conspiracy or an attempt to remain independent, it was a lie .
 Liaquat Ali Khan quoted in Burke and Ziring, op. cit., 27. from K Sarwar Hasan, op., 100. from . Hasan, 100 .
 Nehru’s letter to Bogra dated 9 December 1953 . quoted from Negotiations between the Prime Ministers of Pakistan and India regarding the Kashmir dispute (June 1953-September 1954) quoted in Lamb, 228. quoted from negotiations between Pakistan, Ministry of Kashmir Affairs, Karachi,
 UN Security Council first dealt with the matter on 30 March 1950, 1950, after observing that a constituent assembly was sought to be created in Srinagar . UN had observed that Srinagans sought to create an assembly in S Kashmir .
 Pakistan found itself faced with New Delhi's refusal to resolve the differences on the basis of principles of law and justice . Chapter 4 Search for Security .
 India sought to impose its own will, in disregard of the principles of the partition agreement between the two countries . Whether it was the transfer of Pakistan’s share of the assets inherited from British India, accession of princely states, or continued flow of river waters, India sought
 India dismissed reason and equity in negotiations, spurned resort to impartial peaceful means of resolving differences . India did not hesitate to use force or threat of force to impose its own preferences. Exploiting power disparity, India dismissed power disparity in negotiations .
 India's military intervention in Jammu and Kashmir injected a sense of urgency to the fledgling state’s search for ways and means to bolster its capacity to resist dictation . India's refusal to hold a plebiscite as agreed in Security Council resolutions has injected urgency to Jammu
 Pakistan’s response to the tyranny of power imbalance, and the agony and humiliation of dictation, was in classical style . Pakistan has responded to the objective problem posed by the tyranny . Pakistan's response to power imbalance was in classic style, writes Shah Shah .
 Pakistan embarked upon cultivation of sympathy and support wherever it could be found . As other states have done throughout history when faced with a more powerful neighbour intent on exploiting disparity to achieve its inimical aims, Pakistan has done so far .
 It sought friends and allies, and assistance to strengthen the 'sinews of statehood ’ 1 and to preserve its sovereignty and security . 1 . The country sought friends, allies and assistance, and to strengthen its sovereignty .
 The contours of Pakistan’s foreign policy were shaped by the desperate need for arms to ensure the security of the new state and for funds to finance its economic development . Pakistan's foreign policy was shaped by its need to secure the security and finance the economic development of Pakistan .
 Pakistan first approached Britain for economic and defence assistance . Britain was the only Western country Pakistani leaders knew about first hand .
 Britain was too exhausted and debilitated following the Second World War to render help . Britain was, however, too exhausted to render aid .
 As Pakistan looked for economic and military cooperation, the Soviet Union was not an option . Pakistan was looking for economic, military cooperation with the USSR .
 The Soviet system was unattractive to Pakistani leaders who were committed to democracy . Politically, too, the Soviet system would be unattractive, too .
 The Soviet Union also did not take an initiative to establish an embassy in Pakistan .
 On the Pakistan side, too, inherited and inherent factors prejudiced Pakistan against the Soviet Union, too . The Soviet Union was Pakistan's main rival in the Cold War .
 The Pakistani administrative elite, nurtured in the British strategic view, suspected that the Soviet state cherished the czarist aim of carving out a land access to the warm waters of the Arabian Sea, and therefore, posed a danger to Pakistan’s security .
 They considered communism a secretive and revolutionary movement subversive of law and order . They also considered it a secretive, revolutionary movement . They considered it subversive and subversive .
 Pakistan was by no means hostile to the USSR and in the early years had no interest in the emergent power blocs . However, Pakistan was no longer hostile to Soviet Russia .
 The Soviet record of rapid economic progress evoked admiration and its foreign policy of opposition to colonialism and imperialism made a ready appeal to the British people .
 Progressive artists and litterateurs lauded communist ideals of egalitarianism and full employment . They sang paeans to socialist ownership of means of production and denounced capitalism for colonial domination of labour .
 Few spoke or were even aware of Soviet repression at home and its annexation of territories of neighbouring states and imposition of communism over East European countries . Few were aware of the Soviet invasion of neighbouring countries and annexation of territory .
 The invitation to the Pakistani prime minister to visit the Soviet Union was accepted but not honoured . An episode that aroused much attention at the time and later, later, involved the invitation to Pakistan .
 President Harry S Truman’s invitation to Nehru to visit the United States was announced in May 1949 . The known facts are that the invitation was announced by President Truman in 1949 .
 Josef Stalin’s invitation to Liaquat Ali Khan was delivered at the Pakistan Embassy in Tehran on 4 June . The invitation was delivered in the Pakistan embassy in Tehran .
 Each side suggested visit dates for August, which the other found inconvenient . Each side then suggested visit times for August .
 It was then decided to defer the visit for two months, during which the two sides agreed to establish resident embassies . The two sides then agreed to set up resident embassies instead .
 Pakistan designated an ambassador but Moscow took its time to give agriment while failing to nominate its own ambassador . Russia failed to nominate an ambassador while Pakistan designated a new ambassador .
 According to an informed Pakistani account, neither side acted with any sense of urgency . The incident occurred in Pakistan's capital Islamabad .
 The question as to why the visit to USSR did not take place has remained intriguing . The visit to the Soviet Union has remained mysterious .
 It has been surmised that pique at Truman’s invitation to Nehru provoked Liaquat Ali to solicit an invitation .
 Moscow's immediate response was prompted by a desire to cultivate Pakistan to balance Washington’s courting of Nehru . Conversely, it has been suggested that Moscow’�s immediate response to the crisis was prompted .
 U.S. invitation to Nehru, but not to Liaquat Ali, was a disappointment to the Pakistanis . Announcement of Liaqat Ali's acceptance of Stalin's invitation served to awaken Washington to its omission .
 Ambassador Ispahani from Washington, Pakistan began to receive serious notice and consideration . Overnight, the ambassador's actions began to be considered seriously .
 The ‘desirability of offsetting the impact of Liaquat’s anticipated travel to the Soviet Union, along with balancing Nehru’�s state visit to the United States, were the main arguments for the invitation to the Pakistani leader .
 There is little evidence that the United States invitation to Liaquat Ali caused Moscow to lose interest in his visit to the Soviet Union . U.S. invited the visit to Moscow in 1950s and 1960s .
 Pakistan’s harsh anti-communist rhetoric, and official discouragement of contacts with the Soviet Union . Perhaps, the cooling of Moscow's interest was due to Pakistan's harsh . anti-Communist rhetoric .
 Pakistan refused passports to poets and writers who wanted to visit the Soviet Union . Pakistan refused to allow them to travel to Soviet Union in order to visit .
 The United States was the only promising source of assistance . Approaches to the USA 8: "The U.S. is the best way to get around"
 Emerging from the Second World War with its economy intact, it was the wealthiest nation in the world . It accounted for over 40 per cent of global production .
 It was preoccupied with Soviet expansion in Eastern Europe and the need to stabilise Western Europe through economic and military assistance . It was. however, preoccupied .
 Pakistan’s location next to the Middle East, with its petroleum resources, provided a strategic link of benefit to Pakistan's search for cooperation . The country's location near to the Mideast is a key strategic link for Pakistan's efforts to cooperate .
 The United States was not then alive to the threat in the Middle East, nor was it favourably disposed toward the Pakistan movement . The U.S. did not then live to the threats in the Mideast, nor were it favourable to Pakistan .
 The demand for a state in the name of Islam was difficult for secular America to comprehend . "The demand for an Islamic state is difficult for a secular America," the author says .
 President Franklin D Roosevelt believed a free India could make a useful contribution to the war effort . President Roosevelt was inspired by wartime priorities and anti-colonial predilections .
 The League tried, within its limited means, to educate opinion in the United States . The League was founded by the League of American Opinion .
 The Pakistani leadership carried no grudge against the United States, however, however . The Pakistani government carried no animosity toward the U.S., however .
 President Truman sent a warm message on Pakistan’s independence on 14 August 1947, saying, ‘I wish to assure you that the new Dominion embarks on its course with the firm friendship and goodwill of the United States of America’ A high United States State Department official,
 The U.S. turned down the aid request, saying it did not have funds of that magnitude . The United States was surprised at the amount of aid request .
 The first fumbling request drew a blank, but Pakistan did not give up hope . The first attempt to reach out to the White House was a failure .
 Pakistan did not take the U.S. ‘no’ for an answer and continued to emphasise the commonality of interests . Pakistan has not taken the United States 'no' for a . answer .
 Liaquat Ali Khan said it was ‘unthinkable that Pakistan could fall prey to communism’ and urged the United States to provide economic help to Pakistan .
 During his three-week visit, he seized every opportunity to emphasise the commonality of values and interests between Pakistan and the U.S. During his visit to Pakistan, Mr. Hamid Hussain emphasised the commonity between the two countries .
 He mentioned democracy, fundamental human rights, right of private ownership, equal citizenship of all whether Muslim or non-Muslim . Equality of opportunity, equality of opportunity and equality before law .
 He described Pakistan and the United States as 'comrades’ in the quest for peace and in translating dreams of democracy into reality . He described the U.S. and Pakistan as ‘comrade’
 In speech to Congress he declared ‘no threat or persuasion, no material peril or ideological allurement’ could deflect Pakistan from its chosen path of democracy .
 He avoided pointed criticism of Soviet policy, though he made frequent references to the communist threat .
 Liaquat Ali’s statements of desire to enlarge cooperation with the U.S. impressed the Americans . The official response to his suggestions for aid was unenthusiastic .
 North Korean forces moved across the 38th parallel on 25 June 1950 . North Korea was defeated by North Korea in the Korean War .
 Pakistan voted for the General Assembly resolution authorising the UN operation for the defence of South Korea . Pakistan voted in favour of the UN resolution .
 Pakistan limited its contribution to supply of 5,000 tons of wheat for South Korea . Pakistan decided against sending a military contingent to the SEARCH FOR SECURITY 43 UN action . Pakistan did not send military contingent .
 Pakistan was willing to send an army brigade but only if its own security was assured in the event of Indian aggression . Pakistan would only send a brigade if it was assured of security in event of India aggression .
 Pakistan’s position, combining principle with manifest constraints of security, was generally well understood at home and abroad . Pakistan's position was well understood by both Pakistanis and abroad, says the diplomat .
 India sought to exploit the crisis for advancing its own foreign policy objectives . Its low-key policy was seen by the Western countries to contrast favourably with that of India . Western countries saw India's low key policy as a contrast to that of its own .
 India sought to play a hyperactive mediatory role and presented proposals for settlement of the crisis which were warmly endorsed by Moscow, but resented in Washington . Its support for the UN operation was limited to sending an ambulance unit .
 Otherwise, Pakistani troops could have been involved in fighting against Chinese forces which entered Korea after the UN decided, under American influence, to extend the war into North Korea .
 Pakistan's hopes for assistance from the United States continued to be frustrated for the next two years . Pakistan’s hopes for help from the U.S. continued for the past two years.
 Political instability increased following the assassination of Liaquat Ali Khan . Economic conditions worsened after the end of the Korean War .
 Former foreign secretary M Ikramullah was sent to Washington at the head of a military mission in October 1951 to press for aid . He was sent there at the end of that mission at the start of October 1951 .
 It agreed only to sell arms for $10 million and provide technical and economic development assistance under the Point Four Programme . It only agreed to provide technical assistance and sell arms .
 Another mission headed by Mir Laik Ali was sent by Prime Minister Nazimuddin in July 1952 to ask for an immediate credit of $200 million . Another such mission was sent to the Prime Minister in August 1952 . Another mission was also sent by the prime minister to seek a $200
 U.S. policy toward Pakistan under steady if invisible review in light of changing situation in Asia, Mideast . Policy under review in the light of the changing situation, and especially, the Middle East .
 On the question of China’s representation, Pakistan supported its participation, Pakistan said . Pakistan supported China's participation in the event .
 Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan voiced regret over the absence of China whose people had suffered the most at the hands of Japan’s erstwhile oppressor regime .
 Pakistan's policy on issues in East Asia was appreciated by China, Japan and South Korea . Pakistan’s policy on East Asia has laid the foundation for friendly relations with these important states .
 It also served to embellish Pakistan’s image in the United States as a moderate and cooperative country . The U.S. government has been criticized for its lack of transparency .
 Pakistan was among the first countries to extend diplomatic recognition to the People’s Republic . Pakistan opened a diplomatic mission in Beijing a year later . The People's Republic was proclaimed on 1 October 1949 .
 Differences of ideology did not obstruct the development of friendly relations between the two neighbours . The two nations conducted bilateral relations strictly in conformity with the principles of non-interference in internal affairs .
 China evinced understanding and sympathy for the struggle of other countries of Asia and Africa to maintain their independence and develop their economies . With bitter experience of foreign domination, China evinsed understanding of other Asian countries' struggle to maintain independence .
 For comprehensive factual and analytical treatment of the subject, see Hafeez Malik, Soviet-Pakistan Relations and Post-Soviet Dynamics, 1947-92 . For comprehensive . and analytical . treatment of this subject, read Hafeez . Malik .
 For Soviet attitude toward India and Pakistan during 1947-53 period, see Mxqboot A Bhatty . For Soviet attitudes toward India, Pakistan and Pakistan in 1947 to 1953 period, read Mxkboot A. Bhattty.
 Great Soviet Encyclopaedia, published in 1953, quoted in Maqbool A Bhatty, 103. Great Soviet encyclopaia .
 K Arif, and Dennis Kux for his forthcoming book on the subject, will be published in 2015 . Arif is the author of a book based on Arif's work .
 Bhuno, The Myth of Independence, 38.2, quoted from Indian Annual Register, vol 2.3 . Bhuno: "The myth of Independence" is based on Bhuno's work on the myth of independence .
 Dennis Kux, Disenchenchanted Allies, 13, quoting from United States documents . Dennis . Kux was a member of the Disenchanted . Allies . He was in the U.S. during the Second World War .
 The Kush an kingdom with Peshawar as capital included Chinese Turkistan . The Kush was a kingdom of the Kush . Peshawar was Peshawar's capital .
 Rising security concerns due to India’s exploitation of its military and economic dominance and recurrent threats were the determining factors . Pakistan to search for foreign defence cooperation .
 Britain was unsympathetic because of the priority it attached to relations with the larger India . Britain's priority was to protect its relations with larger India, which was ruled out .
 The United States was reluctant to respond to Pakistan’s efforts for provision of military assistance . For the same reason, the U.S. did not respond to Pakistani efforts to provide military assistance.
 For several years after the Second World War, the U.S. expected Britain to ensure the defence of the West’s interests in the region .
 Pakistani leaders lost no opportunity to project the country’s strategic importance . Pakistanis lost no chance to project their strategic importance, it says .
 Ambassador George McGhee recommended limited American military aid to Pakistan . Ambassador McGhee was impressed by the directness of Pakistani leaders .
 Interest in defence cooperation with Pakistan mounted after the Korean War . AllIANCES 47: Interest in cooperation mounted after Korean War.
 Analysts concluded that the North Korean attack evidenced an expansionist Soviet design . Analysts in Washington concluded that North Korea attack took place less than a year after the triumph of the Chinese liberation struggle .
 They were particularly concerned about the security of the Middle East, especially the vital Persian Gulf region . The Persian Gulf has the world's richest petroleum reserves .
 Washingtons reluctance to make the leap was reinforced by British officials . Americans held regular consultations with British officials with whom Americans were consulted .
 Considered experts on South Asia, they opposed American arms supply to Pakistan . They argued that it would antagonise politically and economically the more important India .
 In effect they uncritically endorsed Indian arguments, ignoring the fact that the Kashmir dispute arose because Pakistan was militarily weak and denial of arms to it could hardly improve prospects of a fair settlement .
 The British were in effect conceding India a veto over arms supply to Pakistan, an objective India has pursued ever since . The British gave India the right to a veto on arms supplies to Pakistan .
 He envisaged assistance to Pakistan to increase its capability to contribute to the defence of the Middle East . Pakistan has been criticised for not having enough resources to defend itself .
 Truman administration endorsed the idea of the Middle East Defence Organization in 1952 . It was conceived by London to shore up its sagging position in the region .
 The problem was that Gamal Abdel Nasser and Nehru opposed the suggestion . The proposal was rejected by Nasser, Nehru and Nasser . Nehru was assassinated in 1961 .
 Post-Korean War perceptions in Washington finally crystallise into a search for a new policy . The new policy is being looked at in a new way to deal with the Korean peninsula .
 Even before the presidential elections, the U.S. realised it had to take the lead . The United States realised it needed to take a lead in the world .
 President Dwight D Eisenhower took office in January 1953, and his secretary of state, John Foster Dulles . The task of launching a major initiative fell to President Eisenhower and Secretary of State Dulles in 1953 .
 As the British idea of MEDO proved a non-starter, the U.S. began to search for an alternative . The United States began to look for a successor to MEDO .
 Secretary Dulles undertook a tour of the Middle East and South Asia in May . Dulles toured the region in May and visited South Asia and Middle East countries .
 Pakistan is the first country to host the U.S. President Barack Obama's visit to Pakistan . Obama was greeted with a warm welcome in Pakistan by President Hussain Hussain .
 Governor General Ghulam Mohammed, Prime Minister Mohammed Ali Bogra and Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan stressed their allegiance to the anti-communist cause . Army Commander-inChief General Ayub Khan argued that the threat to Pakistan’s security could be contained only with the
 His strategic assessment of the threat of a Soviet drive to the warm waters of the Arabian Sea, and Pakistan’s potential for opposing it, made a most favourable impact . His assessment of a potential for opposition to the Soviet drive in the sea made a favourable impact on Pakistan .
 Testifying before the House Foreign Affairs Committee on his return to Washington, he praised the courage and determination of Pakistanis .
 Even before Dulles came to Pakistan, the United States demonstrated its goodwill, reflecting appreciation of Pakistan’s potential importance and friendly disposition .
 Pakistani request for the supply of a million tons of wheat to avert a food crisis was processed with exceptional speed . Pakistan's request for a million tonnes of wheat was processed quickly . The request was processed in exceptional fashion .
 A United States delegation was sent on a study mission to Pakistan in April . A U.S. delegation was also sent on the mission .
 Eisenhower signed the bill in July . Within two weeks Congress gave bipartisan approval and Eisenhower signed it . Eisenhower's signing of the bill was approved by bipartisan approval .
 India mounted a barrage of criticism, arguing that supply of arms to Pakistan would disturb the 'natural balance’ in South Asia . Sensing the new administration’s positive disposition toward Pakistan, India said the arms supply would disturb 'natural balances'
 India’s blind opposition to military aid or sales to Pakistan was obviously motivated by the perverse desire to exploit the existing power disparity to impose its malign agenda on Pakistan . Ignoring international law and practice, India's blind opposition is obviously motivated to exploit its power disparity . India�
 Chester Bowles believed with missionary zeal that India was a democratic counter-model to communist China in the ideological crusade for the mind of the emergent nations . Bowles was an even stronger antagonist to the U.S. Ambassador to India .
 He warned of catastrophe’ if the U.S. supplied arms to Pakistan, which, he said, would provide the Soviet Union with a golden opportunity to enhance its position in South Asia .
 The American embassy in India warned that aid to Pakistan would change the course of U.S. relations with India for a long time to come . The embassy in New Delhi said the aid will change the way India and Pakistan interact .
 We should seek to make it our ally rather than cause it to be hostile to us, says David Cameron . We should make it an ally, he says, rather than be hostile .
 Britain warns aid to Pakistan would antagonise India, wreck negotiations on Kashmir . Pakistan’s limited capacity to play a valuable role in western defence plans, it says .
 Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden even spoke to Dulles who dismissed the British 50 PAKISTAN’S FOREIGN POLICY argument .
 Dulles publicly spoke of the idea of a defence arrangement of 'northern tier’ countries—Turkey, Pakistan, Iraq and Iran . Dulles: 'Northern tier' countries would be Turkey, Pakistan and Iraq .
 In July, the proposal was considered and adopted by the National Security Council .
 Pakistan's request for military aid was still obstructed by fear of the consequences . Washington decided in principle to go ahead with the alliance idea but Pakistan still wanted military aid .
 Ayub Khan went to Washington in September and Ghulam Mohammed in November 1953 . They were disappointed because they received only assurances of sympathy from Washington . The two men were disappointed .
 Dulles counselled patience, and assured them that Pakistan would get aid regardless of India’s attitude . Dulles told the Pakistani leaders that they would get help regardless of their attitude .
 Eisenhower and Dulles were dismissive of the India factor . Neither Eisenhower nor Dulles was dismissive of it .
 Washington informed New Delhi, in 1953, of its intention to provide assistance to Pakistan . In the hope of preempting Indian objections, Washington said in 1953 .
 Nehru denounced the intention and promptly exploited it to renounce India’s pledge of a plebiscite in Kashmir . Nehru then renounced the pledge of an election in Kashmir, saying it would not take place .
 Nehru declared aid to Pakistan would be a step, not only toward war, but even world war . The Indian 'public campaign verged on hysteria’ with Nehru declaring that aid . would be not only . but also a step toward war .
 An inter-agency meeting at the highest operational levd in January 1954, recommended only a ‘modest’ amount of aid to Pakistan . Still, an inter-agencies meeting in 1954 recommended only 'modest' amount of assistance .
 Eisenhower asked the State Department to make a conciliatory approach to India and explain that the U.S. was not trying to help Pakistan against India . The armi for Pakistan were part of a regional security package, and offered a sinilar ALLIANCES 51 pact to India
 He also offered his ‘most sympathetic consideration’ of a request for military aid by India . The US president also offered 'sympathetic consideration' of the request .
 Nehru gave a point-by-point rebuttal, adding a new argument that the arms supply to Pakistan could trigger HinduMuslim tensions in India . Nehru said arms supplies to Pakistan would trigger Hindu Muslim tensions .
 If it did not go ahead with the idea, it concluded, it would be tantamount to giving Nehru a veto over U.S. policy in Asia .
 Nixon, a vocal proponent of arms for Pakistan, warned it would be a fatal mistake to back down . Nixon was a vocal supporter of the arms deal .
 Pakistan and the U.S. signed the first defence agreement on 19 May 1954 . Pakistan signed the agreement with the United States .
 The assistance was to be made available under United States legislation . The Mutual Defence Assistance Act of 1949 and Mutual Security Act of 1951 relating to the defence of the free world .
 The two countries, he said, ‘have a great deal of common’ They shared convictions regarding freedom and democracy and spiritual strength to fight totalitarian concept .
 The idea of the South East Asia Treaty Organization came up in 1954 after the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu . The treaty organization was formed in 1954 .
 It was conceived by the United States in order to create deterrence to communism in general and Vietnam in particular . The U.S. created the idea to create a deterrent to communism .
 Dulles did not envisage the inclusion of South Asian countries but Anthony Eden thought only Thailand and Philippines from the region would make the pact a Western undertaking . Eden thought that inclusion of Thailand, Philippines and Philippines would make it a Western effort .
 He sent a message to these countries on 18 May inviting them to join talks on the defence of the region . He invited the countries to join the talks on defence .
 Acting Foreign Secretary Agha Hilaly told an official of the British High Commission in Karachi that Pakistan would wish to participate in discussions on the defence of South East Asia, East Pakistan being a part of the region . Ambassador Amjad Ali, talking to an official in Washington, observed that Pakistan
 Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan told the U.S. under secretary of state that Pakistan would definitely join if asked . Khan said in July that Pakistan will definitely join .
 Pakistan was invited to attend the Manila Conference in September 1954 to discuss the plan for the defence of South East Asia . The conference was held in Manila, Philippines, to discuss plans for defence .
 Pakistan is disappointed with the small amount of assistance the United States allocated for Pakistan . The chief reason for Pakistan's sudden reservations about SEATO was disappointment with the U.S. assistance . Pakistan has been in talks with the company about the project .
 Ambassador Amjad Ali told the State Department that Ayub Khan was ‘dejected and broken-hearted,’ even regretting that Pakistan had joined in a defence agreement with the United States . Ambassador said he regretted that Pakistan joined in defence agreement .
 Pakistan would have to bear the cost of maintaining its forces, he said . He asked the U.S. ambassador in Karachi to clarify to the Pakistan government that the United States capabilities were limited . The ambassador said that while it would provide equipment to enable Pakistan to play an effective role in
 Similarly, the United States was not in a position to provide massive economic aid . The U.S. was also not in an economic position to help Syrian refugees .
 Dulles believed that it was in Pakistan’s interest to join SEATO but he said it should not do so to oblige the United States . Dulles said Pakistan should not be obliged by the U.S. to do so .
 AllIANCES 53 Pakistan treaty aimed at defence against communist aggression . Treaty excluded involvement in Pakistan-India disputes .
 The government was not satisfied with the first draft of the treaty which would cover only East Pakistan . The government has not been able to reach a consensus on the treaty .
 Unlike NATO, it provided only for consultations, not joint action, in the event of aggression against one of its members . The U.S. did not provide joint action against one member of NATO .
 Treaty did not envisage defence and economic assistance . Nor did the treaty envisage the provision of defence and financial assistance .
 China did not want the treaty to refer to communism or even appear to permit its possible extension to Formosa . Keen not to offend China, the treaty did not appear to mention communism .
 Conference agreed to redraft so as to cover the entire territories of the Asian parties . The conference agreed to a redraft of the agreement .
 Each party recognised that aggression against any of the parties would endanger its own security . In Article IV each party recognises that aggression would endanger their own security.
 The United States added to the treaty the reservation that its obligations would apply only in the event of communist aggression . However, the U.S. remained adamant in appending the reservation . The treaty was signed in 1953 .
 The treaty did not cover Pakistan against Indian aggression so far as the United States, its most powerful member, was concerned . The U.S. is the most powerful nation in the world .
 The brief required the Pakistani delegation to first consult the government before accepting the document . In the circumstances, the brief required a consult with the Pakistani government .
 Foreign Minister Zafrullah Khan decided to sign the treaty despite urging by Dulles . Khan signed the treaty on behalf of Dulles' behalf .
 The Pakistan cabinet was surprised and displeased and some of its members were critical of the foreign minister . Some of the Pakistan cabinet members are critical of foreign minister's actions .
 Much has been made in Pakistan of Zafrullah's decision to exceed his brief but not enough attention has been given to the consequences of his refusal to sign the treaty . Much hoe been made of the decision to .
 Having insisted on an invitation to participate in the conference, it would have been counter-productive to withhold signature. It would be counter-prosecutive to withhold signing of the bill .
 It would have offended other participating states, antagonised opinion in the United States and thus jeopardised the aid Pakistan desperately sought . The U.S. would have been offended by the move, but it would have jeopardised Pakistan's aid .
 Pakistan withdrew from the organization in November 1972 . After East Pakistan was severed, Pakistan withdrew in November .
 Turkey and Iraq laid the foundation of the Baghdad Pact, signing a Pact of Mutual Cooperation for 'security and defence’ in February 1955 in the Iraqi capital . The two countries signed a Pact of Mutual Cooperation for 'security and defence in February 1955 .
 Turkey was unpopular in the Arab world for having recognised Israel . It was unpopular for recognising Israel in the first place . Turkey was also unpopular with Arab nations over recognition .
 Egypt was considered by Britain as the key to a defence arrangement in the Middle East . Egypt denounced the Baghdad Pact, which was seen as a key to Britain's defence .
 On receiving an invitation from Turkey and Iraq to join, Pakistan was not enthusiastic . Pakistan did not want to join but received invitation from both countries .
 Pakistan is no longer keen to undertake further military commitments in the Middle East . Disappointed with the amount of U.S. aid, Pakistan was not keen on further military involvement .
 Ayub Khan, then defence minister as well as commander-in-chief of the army, was sceptical about the worth of the pact unless the U.S. also joined . Khan's opinion was decisive in security matters, and his opinion was crucial .
 Prime Minister Bogra did not make a commitment when the ambassadors of Iraq and Tbrkey met him . Bogra has not made a commitment to Iraq .
 Pressures mounted from the USA as well as Britain, which wanted regional arrangement . Britain wanted a regional arrangement, not so much for the defence of the countries of the region .
 Ayub convinced Ayub of the advantages of joining the pact, explaining that the U.S. could be counted upon to support regional members . The pact involved no additional commitments, Ayub said .
 The Pakistan cabinet approved accession to the Baghdad Pact within days . Within days the Pakistan cabinet agreed to join the Baghdad pact .
 Pakistan wanted to reserve its position in order to limit defence commitments in case of a war involving Turkey as a member of NATO . Formal action was delayed, first, because of major changes in the leadership in Pakistan in August .
 The new prime minister entertained reservations about joining the pact but was over-ruled by President Iskander Mirza . New prime minister, Chaudhri Muhammad Ali, entertained reservations but he was overruled .
 On 23 September 1955, Pakistan signed the Pact of Mutual Cooperation in Baghdad . The other regional members included Iran, Iraq and TUrkey .
 Britain also joined it but the United States did not become a full member . The United States also joined the European Union but did not join it .
 U.S. Congress was concerned about the implications of the treaty in the event of a war involving Israel . The treaty was signed in 1953 .
 The United States decided to become an observer and agreed to association with its defence and political committees . Instead, the U.S. agreed to become a member of the United States' political committees.
 The United States later signed another defence agreement with Pakistan . Since that did not satisfy Pakistan, the U.S. signed another agreement with the country .
 President Nassers denunciation of the Baghdad Pact in general, and of the Iraqi government, made it more vulnerable to criticism . Nasser's denunciation has made the government in particular, for breaking rank with Arab world .
 In 1958, Iraqi regime was overthrown in a bloody coup and the country pulled out of the pact named after its capital . The pact was named after the capital, Baghdad .
 Pakistan did not see eye to eye with London or Washington on issues in the Middle East . Pakistan and the U.S. have been at odds with each other for years . Pakistan has not seen eye-to-eye with London, Washington or Washington .
 It was historically supportive of the Palestinian cause, friendly with Iran, no less under Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh than under the Shahanshah . It was sympathetic toward Egyptian aspirations despite incipient reservations about Neguib-Nasser government’s emphasis on Arab nationalism .
 Pakistan enjoyed especially close relations with Saudi Arabia, jordan and Iraq . Pakistan had close ties with Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Jordan .
 There could be no question of Pakistan joining the West against the interests of Muslim nations in the Middle East . Pakistan could be joined by the Muslim nations against their interests in the Mideast .
 At the same time it hoped for understanding of Pakistan’s own security constraints . Pakistan hopes to understand the security constraints of its own country .
 Prime Minister Suhrawardy informed President Eisenhower of Pakistan’s agreement to the establishment of a secret intelligence base at Badaber near Peshawar . He also asked for permission for United States aircraft to use Peshawar airbase .
 Ayub Khan was said to have made the decision in the light of his assessment of Pakistan’s security imperatives and its economic and military aid needs . Pakistan has 56 foreign aid needs.
 Describing the base as a ‘Communication Centre the United States did not disclose its exact purpose . Describing it as a 'Communication centre the U.S. has not disclosed the exact purpose of it .
 Given extra-territorial rights, it operated the base with some 1,200 military and technical personnel . All personnel were from the United States, all from the U.S.
 No Pakistani was ever admitted to the base and its purpose was indicated in general terms to a very few high Pakistani officials, that it was for electronic eavesdropping on the Soviet Union . The base was intended to be used to spy on Soviet Union, according to Pakistani officials .
 Peshawar airbase was used by high-level U-2 'spy in the sky’ surveillance aircraft for illegal flights over the Soviet Union for photographic intelligence . Peshawar base was also used by U.2 surveillance aircraft .
 The base enabled the U.S. to complete a ring of similar bases around the Soviet Union . It enabled the United States to complete the ring of such bases .
 The alliance was the most concrete and strategic benefit the U.S. derived from the alliance . It increased Pakistan’s importance in the eyes of the strategic community, he says .
 Pentagon played virtually no part in the formation of the CENTO alliance, becoming its main protagonist . CENTO was formed by the Pentagon, which had played no role in forming the alliance . The Pentagon had played virtually little part in formation of CENTO .
 Pakistan did not learn until years later that the facility was also used for the same purpose against China . Pakistan learned later that it had been used in the same way against the Chinese .
 For a decade, the base remained an anchor of U.S. military and economic aid to Pakistan . The base was anchor of United States military, economic aid .
 It was also an important factor in restraining Washington from selling modem weapons systems to India . The U.S. stopped the sale of modem weapons to India in the 1980s .
 In the 1959 agreement the United States made concrete commitments of support to Pakistan's defence . In the agreement the U.S. made concrete pledges of support .
 The agreement was supplemented by a Formal Note presented by Ambassador James Langley to Foreign Minister Manzur Qadir on 15 April 1959 . The U.S. would promptly and effectively come to the assistance of Pakistan if it were subjected to armed aggression .
 Pakistan developed friendly and cooperative relations with China which the U.S. regarded as an adversary . The United States decided to provide military aid to India, which was Pakistan’s adversary, following its border confrontation with China .
 The commitments made in the 1959 agreement did not guide U.S. policy in the Pakistan-India wars of 1965 and 1971 . The commitments were not used in the wars between Pakistan and India .
 It then took the view that its obligation under the 1959 agreement was subject to the clause ‘as may be agreed upon’ and limited to the case of ‘armed aggression from any country controlled by international communism as provided in the Joint Resolution .
 Pakistan felt the United States had let it down by failing to honour its obligation when Pakistan invoked this agreement in 1971 . Pakistan, however, felt the U.S. had let them down by not honouring its obligation .
 The Joint Resolution on the Middle East limited the United States obligation to come to Pakistan’s assistance in the event of aggression by a communist state . Pakistan tried to invoke the agreement in 1965, but the U.S. pointed out that the agreement was limited . The United States pointed
 In subsequent years, the USSR abused its veto power in the Security Council to prevent adoption of every resolution on Kashmir . The USSR was accused of using the veto power to prevent the resolution from being adopted .
 The Soviet Union was outraged by Pakistan’s decision to allow a U.S. spy aircraft to use a Peshawar air base for high-altitude surveillance over Soviet territory . Pakistan was further outraged by the use of the Peshawar base to spy on the Soviet Union .
 President John F Kennedy adopted a policy of befriending India in 1961, but he remained sensitive to Pakistan’s concerns .
 Settlement of Kashmir was ‘a vital United States interest’ as the Indians kept diverting the economic aid that the U.S. was pouring into India to build armaments .
 He gave the assurance that he would try to bring Nehru round to a peaceful settlement of Kashmir . Pakistan could bring the matter to the UN Security Council where the United States would support Pakistan, he said .
 The United States kept this promise when the Kashmir issue came before the UN Security Council in May 1962 . The U.S. kept the promise when it was brought before the Security Council . The Kashmir issue was debated by the UN in 1962 .
 Six other members of the Security Council voted to remind India and Pakistan of earlier Security Council resolutions . It joined six other members in support of a resolution that reminded the two countries of earlier resolutions .
 No sooner had Pakistan joined the alliances than second thoughts arose on the wisdom of the policy . Chapter 6 Alliances—Costs and Benefits -- Cost and Benefits .
 Pakistan's initial policy in the Suez Crisis caused an outrage even at home . Pakistan’s initial policy during the crisis caused outrage at home in the 1970s .
 Pakistan was suddenly isolated in the kindred community of AfricanAsian nations, who were suspicious of the West and looked upon the Soviet Union as a supporter of the struggle for emancipation .
 India exploited Pakistan's decision to join the alliance to renounce its obligation for a plebiscite in Kashmir . Assured of the Soviet veto in the Security Council, India was assured of the veto . Pakistan joined the alliance with the Soviet Union in 1979 .
 Egypt's aspirations to leadership of the Arab world, Egypt says . Concerned about the implications of the alliances for Arab unity, Egypt denounced the proposal .
 Radio Cairo said a Turko-Pakistan alliance would be ‘a catastrophe for Islam...the first stab in our back’ Radio Cairo called it a ‘catastrophe for Islam’
 Even its literal meaning ‘Welcome messenger of peace’ indicated unconcern for the sentiments of Pakistan . Nehru’s message was seldom of peace. It indicated unconcerned for Pakistan's sentiments .
 Pakistanis reserve the word 'rasoof only for the Prophet' The slogan was deeply hurtful to sentiments of Pakistanis because they reserve it for Prophet .
 President Gamal Abdel Nasser’s sudden decision to nationalise the Suez Canal Company in July 1956 was provoked by the American decision to withdraw support for the building of the Aswan High Dam .
 Revenues from the canal were expected to provide an alternative source of funds . The canal will be used to provide a source of revenue for the city's budget .
 Egypt’s exclusive control over the maritime highway would jeopardise their vital trade interests, they said . Though mistaken in retrospect, they imagined that Egypt's exclusive control of the maritime .
 More than half of Pakistan’s trade passed through the Suez Canal . Pakistan, too, was similarly misled, on the ground that more than half . Pakistan was also misled on the fact that half of its trade passed .
 Ceylon, India and Indonesia, too, depended on the Suez Canal for trade . But they recognised the political roots of the issue . Perhaps that was no more than a rationalisation .
 Relations between Pakistan and Egypt had suffered on account of the clash between their policies on alliances with the West . Relations between the two countries had suffered due to the clash on alliances .
 Nasser evinced even less comprehension of Pakistan’s security dilemmas than the Pakistan government did of Nasser s aim of uniting the Arab world for the defence of its dignity against Israel and its Western supporters .
 Pakistan disliked Nasser’s emphasis on Arab nationalism and relegation of the Islamic bond . Pakistan disliked the Arab nationalism of Nasser . Nasser also disliked the role of the Muslim Brotherhood .
 Iraq’s decision to join the Arab League was denounced by Egypt as a treacherous blow to Arab solidarity . Egypt denounced by the U.N. as a ‘treacherous blow’ to the Arab community .
 Its emotional propaganda branded non-Arab Iran, Pakistan and TUrkey as agents of imperialism . The propaganda was aimed at Pakistan, Iran and Pakistan .
 No other issue in Pakistan’s short history posed a sharper and more excruciating dilemma . Pakistan has a history of dealing with terrorism, terrorism and terrorism .
 It failed to have credibility for the policy it thought best served the national interest . Lacking roots in the people, it failed to gain credibility for its policy, critics say .
 The people of Pakistan, who were wholly and uncritically supportive of Egypt, denounced it . Pakistan's people were "wholly and uncritical" supportive of the Egyptian government .
 The government had to correct its course but only after Pakistan’s name had suffered much damage . The government has had to change its course . Pakistan's name had been badly damaged by the government's actions, says Shah .
 The masses, the media and revered veterans of the Pakistan movement wanted unqualified support for Egypt . Fatima Jinnah and Sardar Abdur Rab Nishtar were among those who wanted support .
 Pakistan's approach lost balance and its diplomacy credit as it came under pressure . Pakistan has lost balance as it comes under pressure, says Imran Khan .
 Foreign Minister Hamidul Haq Chowdhury personally assured Nasser of Pakistan’s support . Nasser was in London to attend the conference of major users in mid-August .
 At conference, he succumbed to pressure and decided, apparently without clearance from the prime minister, to join 18 countries in supporting the suggestion for an international board to supervise the canal .
 Egypt does not think international supervision detracted from Egypt’s sovereignty, he said . He said he didn’t think such international supervision would have affected his sovereignty .
 The Pakistan delegation’s vote provoked a charge of betrayal by Nasser, which was orchestrated by media throughout the Arab world, it also raised a political storm in Pakistan . Nasser's decision to abstain from the vote in the vote was orchestrated in advance of the vote .
 Pained by the obloquy Pakistan incurred in the Muslim world, political parties including the ruling Muslim League censured the government’s policy .
 The masses came out to protest Foreign Minister Chowdhury’s attempt to explain the vote failed to carry conviction . The masses protested the Foreign Minister's attempt to justify the vote .
 Prime Minister Muhammad Ali resigned in September for internal political reasons . Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy became prime minister .
 Pakistan made amends at the second London conference, held in September . Chastened by the blunder at the first London conference . Pakistan has since apologised for the mistake .
 Foreign Minister Firoz Khan Noon was the only delegate to speak out against the proposal to set up a users’ association . The proposal was rejected by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan .
 Suez episode confirmed the view of those who regarded alliances as a liability . Pakistan was seen to have obliged ally Britain and supported its imperialist aim at the cost of a Muslim country with a just cause .
 Pakistani leaders were not enamoured of communism, and some military analysts thought also of the historical Soviet drive towards the warm waters of the Arabian Sea .
 Moscow threw its powerful weight behind India in Pakistan-India disputes . Russia threw its neutral stance in Pakistan and India disputes . Moscow had been neutral in the matter of Pakistan and Kashmir .
 USSR announced aid for a big steel plant in India . Promising ‘all help’ to make India industrially strong, 5 the USSR announced .
 Soviet leaders also visited Afghanistan and demonstrated their hostility toward Pakistan by announcing support for Pushtoonistan . Pakistan was ruled by the Soviet Union in the 1950s .
 They extended a credit of $100 million to Afghanistan, which they later added $85 million for the KushkKandahar road and the Shindad military airfield . The credit was also extended to Afghanistan in 2010 .
 Pakistan did not—could not afford to—abandon the policy . The costs of the alliances were high, but Pakistan didn't—couldn't afford to abandon the policy .
 Guarantees against the ever-present security threat constrained reappraisal . Guarantees for the security of the U.S. government will be reviewed .
 Pakistan went on to strengthen the alliance with the United States by signing another defence agreement in April 1959 . In fact, Pakistan signed a defence agreement with the U.S. in 1959 .
 Pakistan’s purpose in joining the alliances was primarily to contain the Indian threat in which the United States had little interest . Pakistan joined the alliances to contain an Indian threat which the U.S. had no interest .
 The U.S. did not at first ‘dare’* to give military assistance to Pakistan . Deterred by the predictable repercussions on its relations with the larger and more influential India, the United States did not . The United States has not given Pakistan military assistance since the
 The need to strengthen security in the Middle East with its strategic oil resources impelled the U.S. and Britain to harness Pakistan . Pakistan is a key ally of the United States and Britain in Afghanistan .
 With its location close to the Persian Gulf, its military manpower and its friendly predisposition, it was a 'real bulwark,’ as Dulles said . It was a real bulwark .
 The United States remained excessively sensitive to Indian preferences . But even then, the U.S. remained overly sensitive to India's preferences .
 Eisenhower sent a letter of explanation to Nehru assuring him that the arms given by the United States to Pakistan would not be allowed to be used for aggression . Eisenhower also offered to supply arms to India as well .
 The U.S. announced only $29. million in military aid to the Soviet Union in 1954 . The United States was disappointed by the lack of military aid .
 Pakistan argued aid did not compensate Pakistan for the additional risks it assumed by openly allying itself with the U.S.
 Washington did not expect Pakistani leaders to protest so vociferously against the move .
 Pakistan was a target of Soviet hostility and therefore entitled to adequate aid to make it secure . The U.S. appeared to imply it was being forced on them .
 The United States increased economic assistance to $106 million for 1954 and boosted military aid for 1955 to $50 million . The U.S. increased economic aid for 1954 .
 The United States pledged to equip four infantry divisions, one armoured division and another armoured brigade . The U.S. also pledged to provide modem aircraft for six squadrons for the air force and supply twelve vessels for the navy .
 Despite Indian protests, U.S. economic and military aid for Pakistan rapidly increased . Despite protests, United States economic and . military aid increased .
 Over the 1954-1962 period, U.S. economic assistance amounted to $3. billion . Altogether, over the 1950-60 period, United States economic assistance totaled $3 billion . The United States provided economic assistance to the Philippines over the same period .
 Pakistan’s armed forces became a powerful defence machine in 1954 . From an antiquated, poorly equipped force in 1954, the armed forces were confident of its self-defence capability .
 Suhrawardy expressed satisfaction over the 'dividends’ of the country’s foreign policy . Speaking in the National Assembly in February 1957, he said he was pleased with the results of the policy .
 Its second thoughts continued to grow because of criticism by friends and penalties by adversaries . The second thoughts of the government have grown because of its second thoughts .
 Pakistani grievance is no longer about the quantity of American aid as about the quality of its political support . Pakistani grievance was no longer so much about quantity of U.S. aid but about quality of political support.
 The United States’ desire to maintain friendly relations also with India was allIANCES—COSTS AND BENEFITS 67 nderstandable but not so a policy that downgraded an ally to a level f parity with a nominally neutral state with a pro-Soviet
 India was awarded for hunting with the hounds and running with the hare . USA and USSR were competing for its favours .
 The seeds of disaffection were inherent in the . ambiguous bargain, he alliance lacked the bond of a common adversary . The seeds were inherent .
 The United States premise was that Pakistan wild play a major part in the defence of the Middle East . The U.S. premise is that Pakistan will play a key role in the Mideast defence .
 Pakistan felt it was doing the U.S. favour, exaggerating its costs and undervaluing the benefits . Having first 3ught the alliance, Pakistan soon felt it did the United States favour, it said . Pakistan felt the benefits of the alliance were undervalued .
 Pakistan entered into another agreement with the U.S. in 1959 . In 1959, Pakistan and the United States entered into an agreement . The agreement was the first of its kind .
 At the popular level Pakistani dissatisfaction was articulated in the ultural context that expects a friend to be constant and loyal, ipportive and self-sacrificing . At the . popular level, Pakistani dissatisfaction has been articulated in an ultura context .
 Pakistan lacked adequate leans to ensure defence against the ever-looming Indian threat . Lacking adequate leans, it was erfectly rational for Pakistan to look for alliances to compensate for power disparity .
 Opposition to the policy of alliances lcreased over the years because it cut across other aims and spirations of the people . Opposition to alliances lincreased over years because of the policy .
 People of Pakistan had a deep-seated esire of solidarity with other Muslim peoples . Foremost among these was the deep seire of the people for solidarity with others .
 If the :ate allowed security policy to clash with the national aspiration for jpport of the cause of a Muslim nation, the people of Pakistan felt >rn, and the more open the contradiction, the greater was the popular pposition, the popular .
 Nowhere did opposing priorities clash more glaringly than in the Suez crisis . Nowhere else did they mesh so perfectly as i the Afghanistan crisis a quarter of a century later .
 The contradiction could have been reconciled as it was in the final age of the Suez crisis . The conflict was the height of the crisis in the 1970s .
 A government in tune with public opinion light have done it sooner, but those in power at the time contributed to widening the gulf by flouting popular sentiments and antagonising the Egyptian leader .
 Popular views in Pakistan about the United States and the Soviet Union not as clear-cut as those of the government . Popular views about the U.S. and Soviet Union were not as strong as those in Pakistan .
 Political opinion ranged against the United States and Britain because of their support for the creation of a Zionist state in Palestine at the expense of its predominantly Muslim population . The capitalist system was considered abominable, its exploitative nature manifest in the striking gulf between the rich and the poor .
 The Soviet Union achieved rapid development and redistribution of wealth on an equitable basis . Despite the official heritage of suspicion of Russian expansionism and subversive communism, the popular view admired the Soviet Union for rapid development .
 Opinion swayed by progressive writers and poets with idealist depiction of socialism . Millions liquidated or terrorised by brutal and ruthless state machinery . Stalinist repression .
 The Soviet suppression of religion, prohibition of public prayers and the demolition of all but a few hundred of the 27,000 mosques and 80,000 churches that existed during the czarist period remained unknown because the carefully selected Pakistani visitors were rarely interested in seeing the seamy side of their socialist
 The United States policy was to change dramatically after the Sino-Indian border dash in 1962 . The U.S. policy on the border between China and India was to be changed dramatically .
 Opinion in the United States began to change in favour of India . But even before that, opinion in the U.S. was changing, opinion was changing .
 Pakistan was not alone in having second thoughts about the policy of alliances . Pakistan not alone had second thoughts on the U.S. policy .
 Opinion in the United States, too, began to swing within a few years, illustrated by the radical change in evaluation of neutralism . The U.S. has a history of turning around neutralism in the past few years .
 At first allies were admired and rewarded, neutral states criticised and penalised in allocation of economic assistance . Neutral states criticised or penalised the economic assistance given to neutral states .
 Professors Walt Rostow and Max Milliken of MIT called for aid to India and other countries faced with ‘the revolution of rising expectations’ in order to enable them to achieve ‘take off’ under democracy .
 Adlai Stevenson, Averell Harriman and Chester Bowles and Senator Cooper became massive-aid-to-India advocates . Adl. Stevenson, . Averelli Harrimans and former ambassadors to India Chester Bowle and . Senator Cooper .
 He even defended Indian neutrality recalling that during its formative period in the nineteenth century America, too, followed noninvolvement .
 Opinion in Pakistan is deeply agitated by the change in U.S. policy . Opinion in Pakistani opinion is deeply disturbed by the new policy . Pakistanis are deeply upset by the changes in the policy .
 The West was becoming lukewarm in its support for Pakistan on the Kashmir question . The West became lukemwarm in support of Pakistan on Kashmir issue .
 It seemed to have made a bad bargain politically, if not also materially, with the White House .
 Pakistan suffered loss of esteem due to its alliance with the West . Neutralism enhanced India’s prestige, with the Soviet Union and U.S. competing for its goodwill and giving it aid .
 The United States was impressed by the architect of the alliance, the U.S. administration was impressed . Hearing this from one of the architects of the NATO alliance was impressed.
 Even before embarking on a collision course with China on the border issue, India was flaunting itself as a counter-model to China . India has flaunted itself as an anti-China model .
 In 1958, he joined with Republican Senator John Sherman Cooper to sponsor a resolution for enhanced aid to India . In 1958 he sponsored a resolution to enhance aid to the country .
 India’s support for the secessionist Dalai Lama in 1959 provided a further fillip to burgeoning U.S. support for India . Deterioration in India's relations with China due to disagreement over the boundary .
 It was proclaimed a ‘key country’ 11 in the West’s struggle against communism . It was declared a key country in the struggle against communist communism .
 Eisenhower administration increased aid from $93 million in 1956 to $365 million in 1957“ and a record $822 million in 1960 . Eisenhower administration had started by cutting aid to India .
 President Eisenhower interceded with other Western leaders and the president of the World Bank to enhance economic support for India . Eisenhower also intercede with other . Western leaders to enhance support for Indian economy .
 In December 1960, Pakistan signed an agreement with the Soviet Union for exploration of petroleum resources . The agreement marked the beginning of an improvement in bilateral relations . Pakistan signed a deal to explore petroleum resources in December 1960 .
 The wooing of India became even more pronounced after John F Kennedy became president . India was wooing the U.S. after the Kennedy administration .
 He regarded India as ‘the ALLIANCES—COSTS AND BENEFITS 71 key area’ in Asia . Although he was not unaware of ‘Nehru's talent for international self-righteousness’
 In his inaugural address he paid high tribute to ‘the soaring idealism of Nehru’ and placed ardent Indophiles in key positions . He paid tribute to the ‘thrilling idealism’ of the Indian leader .
 The administration provided $1 billion for aid to India in its first budget . The administration has also provided $2 billion in aid for India .
 The U.S. also decided to provide a 400megawatt nuclear power plant to India . Soon, the United States also decided .
 Pakistan welcomed the opportunity provided by Vice President Johnson’s visit in May 1961 to get its message across to the new U.S. administration . The visit was a chance to get Pakistan's message across .
 He was impressed by the case made by President Ayub Khan for resolution of Kashmir dispute and provision of U.S. military equipment .
 In his welcoming speech he expressed concern over the ‘misunderstandings’ that had arisen . He expressed concern about the 'misunderstoods’ in his welcome speech .
 He was evidently aware of Pakistan’s perception of declining U.S. support .
 Ayub Khan gave an account of India’s stonewalling on Kashmir . During talks, Ayub gave a detailed account of the Indian government's stonewall .
 He promised to speak to Nehru, and if unsuccessful, to support Pakistan at the U.N. If unsuccessful, he would speak to him at the United Nations .
 Ayub Khan told Kennedy he was going to publicly advocate the restoration of the rights of the People’s Republic of China in the U.N. Khan . Khan said he wanted to restore China's rights in the United Nations . Khan was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Ayub Khan did so during the NBC’s 'Meet the Press’ and ABC's ‘Editors’ Choice’ TV programmes .
 The previous evening he had been taken by decorated launches down the Potomac to President Washington’s historic house .
 Mount Vernon, for a glittering banquet, personally planned by Mrs Kennedy . Mrs Kennedy personally planned the event for the first time .
 Kennedy entertained high hopes of Indian leader, but after talks he felt disappointed . Kennedy entertained hopes of the Indian leader but was disappointed with the outcome . Kennedy felt disappointed with Indian leader .
 When Kashmir was discussed, Nehru was rigid and dogmatic, ruling out any solution other than perpetuation of the division of the state . Nehru ruled out a solution to the Kashmir issue . Kashmir was ruled out of Kashmir by Nehru .
 It was partly because at seventy-one his energies were depleted but partly, too, it was his self-centred focus . At seventy, at seventy, he was able to focus more on himself than anyone else in the world .
 Washington was further disillusioned when, in December 1961, India invaded defenceless Goa . The U.S. became disillusioned with India after it invaded Goa in 1961 .
 Neither disappointment with Nehru nor admiration for Ayub Khan had much influence on American policy of support for India in the context of their relations with China .
 Kennedy proposed to appoint World Bank president, Eugene Black, to lend his good offices to India and Pakistan to settle the Kashmir dispute . That afternoon Kennedy announced that he proposed that he propose to appoint Black to help settle the issue .
 Pakistan decides to move the Security Council to take up consideration of Kashmir dispute . Pakistan decided to move it to the UN Security Council . The Kashmir dispute has been a source of tension between Pakistan and India .
 Kennedy's commitment to Ayub Khan, the U.S. administration was hesitant to extend support . The United States was reluctant to support Khan .
 Dean Rusk told Ambassador Aziz Ahmed and Zafhillah Khan, then representative to the UN, that reaffirm our position in the Security Council will affect our ability to be of use .
 Zaffullah Khan asked Rusk to determine what was holding up progress and who could do what, so that the block could be removed . Khan: "We need to find out what is holding up and who can do what to remove the block .
 Assistant Secretary of State Talbot asked if Pakistan would go back to the resolutions of the Security Council . Assistant Secretary Talbot said Pakistan would not return to the resolution of the Council .
 Talbot said India was of the view it was not feasible to implement the resolutions as so much time had elapsed . When Zafrullah Khan replied there was no other way, Talbot commented .
 Members from non-aligned countries were reluctant to move a resolution . Under pressure from India, members from non.-aligned countries have been reluctant .
 The Republic of Ireland agreed to sponsor a resolution that reminded India and Pakistan of past resolutions of the Security Council calling for a plebiscite in Kashmir .
 Seven out of the Council’s nine members supported the resolution but it was vetoed by the Soviet Union . Soviet Union vetoed the resolution .
 Dawn of 22 February 1954 in Burke and Ziring, op. cit., 202. Quoted from Dawn of the Dawn of February 1954 . Dawn was the first time Dawn was seen in the United States since 1954 .
 Quoted from Dawn of 26 September 1955 in Burke and Ziring op. cit., 204. Quoted .
 Statement issued on 14 August 1956, quoted in Burke and Ziring, op. dt., 185. Statement issued in 1956 . Statement issued August 14 .
 SEATO council declared at its meeting in Karachi on 8 March 1956 that sovereignty of Pakistan extends up to the Durand Line' and the treaty area included territory up to that line .
 The table below illustrates the level of U.S. economic assistance to Pakistan . The table includes grants and soft loans, including both soft loans .
 Data for 1953-70 is from Effectiveness of Aid to Pakistan, March 1990, Economic Affairs Division, Government of Pakistan, and from 1971 from Economic Survey, 1995-96, Finance Division .
 Report of National Security Council meeting of 3 January 1957 quoted in Dennis Kux, op. cit.4. Report of meeting of three January 1957 quote from Dennis . Kux: Report of national security council meeting of January 3, 1957 quoted .
 U.S. aid to Pakistan increased marginally from S162. million in 1956 to $170 million in 1957 .
 Phillips Talbot, an India specialist, became Assistant Secretary of State for the Near East and South Asia . John Kenneth Galbraith was appointed ambassador to New Delhi . Phillips Talbott was an India expert and a Harvard professor known for his sympathy for India .
 Ayub ‘charmed everybody’ during his visit to the USA, ‘ingratiated’ himself with Mrs Kennedy and 'shone' himself at a gala dinner . Ayub 'charmed' himself and ‘shone’ at the g
 Vice President Johnson described Ayub as a ‘seasoned’ leader and a dependable’ ally . Ayub was a 'seasoned' leader and 'dependable' ally, Johnson said . Vice President Ayub died at the age of 92 .
 Robert Kennedy in His Own Words, and Arthur Schlesinger, A Thousand Days, in McMahon, op. cit., 281. Quoted from Robert Kennedy's own words .
 Pakistan recognised the Peoples Republic of China in 1950 soon after the revolution . Pakistan recognises the People's Republic in 1950 .
 Relations were amicable and remained on an even keel despite Pakistan’s criticism of communism and its increasing cooperation with the United States, as well as tension in Sino-US relations . Relations remained amicable despite Pakistan's criticism of Communism .
 Even after Pakistan joined SEATO, China criticised the alliance but not Pakistan . China criticised Pakistan for joining the alliance, but not China .
 Unlike the Soviet Union, it understood that Pakistan's motivation was the need for security against the Indian threat, not any hostility toward China or any other nation . The Soviet Union understood the need to protect Pakistan from India, unlike any other country .
 More impressive for Pakistan was the avoidance of any partisan pronouncement on Pakistan-India disputes . Chinas avoided partisan pronouncements on Pakistan and India disputes . More impressive than Pakistan was Chinas avoiding any partisan remarks .
 Pakistan did not seek to strengthen relations with India at Pakistan’s expense, it said . It said it was not seeking to strengthen ties at the expense of Pakistan . India did not want to strengthen its relations with Pakistan at Pakistan's expense .
 Zhou Enlai did not criticize Pakistan during a visit to India at the height of the ‘Hindi-Chini bhai bhai’ phase in June 1954 . Even during a trip to India in 1954, Premier Zhou enlai didn't criticize Pakistan .
 Zhou Enlai said he was hurt by Pakistan’s statement, because he regarded Pakistan as a friend . Zhou called for resistance to interference by ‘external communist, anti-communist or other agencies’ Premier Zhou said the Pakistani ambassador was hurt .
 He expressed the hope that Pakistan would follow principles of peaceful coexistence . He said he hoped that the government would follow the principles of peace .
 Pakistan did not fail to notice Chinese forbearance and henceforth followed a more balanced policy . Pakistan has followed China's more moderate approach to foreign policy .
 At the Afro-Asian summit conference in Bandung in April 1955, Bogra asked for a meeting with the Chinese premier . Zhou Enlai insisted on coming over himself to the meeting .
 Zhou readily accepted Bogras explanation that Pakistan’s membership of SEATO was not directed against China . Zhou readily accepts Bogras’ explanation that . Pakistan has not been able to reach out to China .
 On the other, it did not oppose a resolution sponsored by the United States for the postponement of the consideration of the question of China’s representation, and instead abstained in 1952 and 1957 .
 In October 1959, Pakistan voted 78 PAKISTAN’S FOREIGN POLICY for a UN General Assembly resolution calling for 'respect for the fundamental human rights of the Tibetan people and for their distinctive cultural and religious life'
 Ayub Khan made the extraordinary proposal of joint defence with India in April 1959 . In April 1959, he proposed joint defence between the two countries .
 Pakistan and India need to cooperate to forestall the danger, he said . Perhaps he genuinely believed’s 10 that Pakistan needed to cooperate with India to forestan the danger .
 Perhaps he hoped to convince Nehru to realise the desirability of resolving the Kashmir issue in the interest of defending the region .
 Ayub Khan's statements were incongruent with emergent strategic realities and Pakistan’s interests . Whatever his reasons, the statements were inappreciated by the Pakistani president .
 It is a tribute to the wisdom and foresight of Chinese leaders that Beijing continued to show extraordinary forbearance, overlooking Pakistan’s aberrations . Beijing has continued to be wary of Pakistan's aberrances .
 After 1959, friendship and cooperation between the two countries followed a steady and unswerving path . Friendship and cooperation became a crucial factor for peace in South Asia . The two countries' friendship was crucial factor in peace in the region .
 No other country has been as comprehending of Pakistan’s constraints as China . China has been understanding of Pakistan's constraints as well as other countries .
 The United States was already hostile to China, with its naval and air power operating close to China’s seaboard . The U.S. already has its naval, air power and military presence close to the Chinese seaboards .
 China is now concerned also about India, which is giving encouragement to separatist elements in Tibet . Resolutely resisting both superpowers, China was now concerned about India's influence .
 Beijing understood the difficulties Pakistan faced at the hands of India, backed by the Soviet Union . Beijing understood even better than before before .
 Pakistan demonstrated the courage to resist the political and economic pressures of its American ally in grasping China’s hand of friendship across the Karakorum Range and breaching the ring the USSR and India sought to build around China .
 Pakistan approached China in November 1959 with the proposal for demarcation of the border between the two countries . Pakistan-China Boundary Agreement, 1962 was signed by Pakistan in 1962 .
 Pakistan was encouraged by China’s eminently reasonable posture, manifest in its boundary agreement with Myanmar, in January 1960, to their complete mutual satisfaction . Pakistan was encouraging by China's eminentlyreasonable posture .
 Its boundary agreements with Nepal and Thailand were also amicably negotiated . Its boundary agreement with Nepal, Thailand and Nepal also negotiated .
 In March 1961, Pakistan sent a formal note to China proposing negotiations on the boundary . Pakistan sent the letter to China in March 1961 proposing negotiations .
 Beijing was still hesitant because the matter involved Kashmir territory and it did not want to have another argument with India . Beijing was hesitant because it was concerned about Kashmir territory . It was still reluctant to take action because of the matter .
 The problem took time to resolve but a formula was found whereby the boundary to be demarcated would be between Xinjiang and the contiguous areas ‘the defence of which was under the control of Pakistan’ thus by-passing the question of sovereignty over the territory .
 On 4 May 1962, the two countries announced agreement to begin negotiations . The two countries began negotiations in 1962 . The negotiations began in May 1962 .
 It involved no transfer of territory from the control of either country to the other . The two countries fought over control of each other .
 It appealed for an exception to the watershed principle to save hardship to the poor people . The government then appealed for a special exception for the poor .
 The Indian allegation that Pakistan ceded a part of Kashmir territory to China was unfounded . The Indian claim was based on Pakistan's claim that it had ceded part of the Kashmir region to China .
 Since a recognised boundary historically did not exist, there could be no question of any such giveaway . Since that didn't exist, it could not be ruled out of any giveaway .
 The boundary agreement was motivated by a desire to preclude any controversy between the two neighbours . The agreement was made to prevent any controversy from the neighbours .
 In the early 1960s, Washington was intent on isolating China . Pulling India into its orbit was a dominant passion of the time for the U.S.
 Pakistan was seen to be an obstruction, and the U.S. had no hesitation in pulling levers of pressure in its attempt to bring Pakistan into line . The United States was seen as an obstruction of Pakistan's sovereignty .
 China's policy toward Pakistan was to observe implicit respect for Pakistan’s sovereignty . Sino-Pakistan Entente was a unique characteristic of China‘s policy . China”s policy toward the Pakistanis was to respect their sovereignty .
 During exchanges of views with their Pakistani counterparts, they would describe their own experiences and let Pakistanis draw the conclusion if they so wished .
 When Pakistan embarked on improvement of relations with the Soviet Union in 1960, the Chinese leaders did not try to hold Pakistan back . Beijing-Moscow relations had begun to sour, and even expressed understanding of Pakistan's reasons .
 Relations between Pakistan and China continued to deepen in the wake of the boundary agreement . Pakistan defied Anglo-American pressures to join their policy of support for India against China during the Sino-Indian border war .
 Pakistan established air links with China, breaching U.S. strategy aimed at containment and isolation of China . Pakistan also demonstrated a firm independent stance when, despite sanctions imposed by the United States, it established air link with China .
 On their way to countries of the Middle East, Africa and Europe, Chinese leaders transited through Pakistan . Pakistan provides opportunities for achieving closer sympathetic understanding of each other’s concerns .
 Ayub Khan was accorded an effusive welcome during his visit to China in March 1965 . Khan visited China in 1964 and 1965 . His visit to the country was the first to visit China since 1964 .
 Chairman Mao Zedong expressed warm appreciation for Pakistan’s support . Chairman Mao Zadegan said he was impressed by Pakistan's support for China .
 Pakistan joined China in denouncing the ‘two Chinas’ policy of the U.S. In the joint communique, Pakistan joined . Pakistan joins China in . denouncing the 'two . Chinas' policy . The United States.
 Kashmir dispute remains unresolved and considered its continued existence a threat to peace and security in the region . Also ‘the two parties noted with concern that the Kashmir dispute remained unresolved’
 Gwadar territory on the Balochistan coast had been given to the Sultan of Oman by the Khan of Kalat on the occasion of his daughter’s wedding . In the nineteenth century the territory was given to Oman by Khan of the Khan .
 Pakistan sought its return and reunion by amicable negotiation through the UK government . Pakistan sought the return of the Pakistan-Syria war dead through negotiations . Pakistan is seeking its return to the UK .
 An agreement was reached in 1958 by which the fraternal sultanate ceded the territory to Pakistan .
 Pakistan agreed to allow continued recruitment of personnel for the sultanate forces from Gwadar . Apart from a modest payment, Pakistan has agreed to let continued recruitment continue .
 The peaceful transaction ensured the maintenance of friendly relations between Pakistan and Oman as well as the continued enjoyment of benefits of employment in Oman by the people of Balochistan . The transaction also ensured the continuation of the peace between the two countries .
 Egypt is said to be the gift of the Nile, Pakistan is the gift to the Indus . Indus Waters Treaty, 1960, was signed by Pakistan .
 Of the thirty-seven million acres of land irrigated by canals from the Indus River and its tributaries, in 1947 over thirty million acres were in Pakistan . This is an area equal to the irrigated lands in Egypt and Sudan .
 Indus and its major tributaries rise in or beyond the Himalayas and flow through Indian-held Kashmir or India . The Indus is one of the largest rivers in the world and flows through India's borders .
 In 1948, India cut off supplies to the canals flowing from headworks under its control, ignoring Pakistan’s rights under international law . India decided unilaterally to cut supplies to supplies to Pakistan in 1948 . Pakistan says it has never been cut off by India .
 It also embarked on the construction of the 82 PAKISTANI FOREIGN POLICY Bhakra Dam on the Sutlej, In order to divert the entire water supply of the river .
 Negotiations over highly technical issues took eight years to resolve . Negotiating over technical issues with the government took 8 years .
 It allocated the waters of the three eastern rivers for use by India and the western rivers for Pakistan . The waters were allocated to India, except for domestic and non-consumptive uses of the river waters in the areas under Indian control .
 The treaty required India to pay $170 million while the United States contributed over $500 million . Australia, Britain, Canada, Germany and New Zealand donated the rest of the money .
 The Indus Waters Treaty was also farsighted in anticipating problems that might arise in interpretation and implementation of the complex agreement .
 World Bank experts in law, economics, construction and engineering foresaw as many contingencies as were likely to arise . Treaty provides self-executing mechanism for peaceful resolution in professional manner .
 The Permanent Indus Commission, comprising high-level technical representatives of the two sides, has responsibility to resolve differences of interpretation and ensure smooth implementation .
 In case the commission is unable to agree on a question’ of interpretation, the matter can be taken up at the level of government . If governments also cannot agree, the ‘difference’ can be referred to a ‘neutral expert’ to be appointed by the
 India protested that the road was built ‘through indisputably Indian territory’ in 1914 . The line was drawn in 1914 pursuant to discussions between McMahon and a representative of Tibet whose claim to sovereignty was contested .
 India adopted a 'forward policy' hoping to negotiate from a position of strength . Emboldened by Soviet military supplies and the Kennedy administration’s stepped-up economic assistance, while China was under increasing Soviet pressure .
 Its forces undertook aggressive patrolling and built military posts in the disputed area . The region is disputed by the U.S. government .
 The easy conquest of Portuguese ruled Goa in December 1961 made Indian leaders even more reckless . Goa was ruled by the Indian state of Goa until 1961 .
 In February 1962 an Indian minister publicly threatened 84 PAKISTAN'S FOREIGN POLICY to ‘drive out the Chinese forces’ In September India sent a brigade to Thagla Ridge in the northeast in September .
 On 11 October 1962, Nehru gave a call for battle, declaring ‘Our instructions are to free our territory’ Nehru declared on 11 October, 1962 . Nehru was assassinated in October 1962 .
 General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman, U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in testimony before a congressional committee that India might have started the war . Taylor: India may have started war with the West .
 China proposed mutual withdrawals to twenty kilometres from the line of actual control, to be followed by talks . On 24 October, China, for the third time proposed mutual withdrawal to 20 kilometres from actual control .
 Nehru appealed to the Western countries as well as the Soviet Union for support and assistance against China . Nehru: The Western countries should support us in the war .
 Moscow was reluctant to side with India in the border dispute . Moscow, despite its growing differences with China, has been reluctant to back India .
 Britain and the United States responded readily, perceiving in the border clash a golden opportunity to pull India into the West's orbit . The U.S. and Britain responded readily .
 The United States ambassador in New Delhi, John Kenneth Galbraith, had already embarked on efforts, more pathetic than comic, to coax a request for military aid from Nehru himself .
 Israel, too, responded to Nehru’s request by sending a shipload of heavy mortar . Israel also sent heavy mortar to India .
 Nehru flew into a panic when the fighting was still limited to the border . Nehru was forced to withdraw from India after the fighting began .
 New Delhi projected a general war, imagining that the Chinese forces would descend into the Gangetic plane . Ignoring the nature of the Himalayan terrain and the approaching RELATIONS with CHINA and other developing relations with the country .
 Kennedy decided to dispatch an aircraft carrier, the USS Enterprise, to the Bay of Bengal . The Enterprise was the first aircraft carrier to arrive in the region of the world .
 He refused to acknowledge the existence of the diapute, claiming the disputed territory was an integral part of India . The territory was claimed by the Indian government .
 He spurned Premier Zhou’s offers of negotiations and rejected his proposals for mutual withdrawals . Zhou spurned his offers of negotiations and proposed mutual withdrawal .
 He simply wanted China to acquiesce in his interpretation of where the boundary lay, he said . He said: "He simply wanted to . acquiesce"
 Pakistan viewed the border conflict as a limited and local affair, precipitated by Indian provocation . Pakistan views the conflict as an internal affair, but viewed it as a local affair .
 The United States and the United Kingdom implicitly accepted, indeed encouraged, Nehru’s exaggeration of the Chinese threat and the projection of a border conflict as an invasion and war threatening occupation of India .
 When Nehru approached the United States for military aid, the U.S. agreed to provide arms to India . Washington seized the opportunity with alacrity and agreed .
 Opinion in Pakistan was outraged when the U.S. and the UK rushed arms to India . The U.K. and Pakistan have been accused of selling arms to the Indian state .
 People felt betrayed, realizing that the arms would enhance India’s offensive capability to the detriment ultimately of Pakistan . Pakistanis felt betrayed by the arms .
 He said he understood Pakistani concerns and agreed to launch joint efforts with Harold Wilson to promote Kashmir settlement . At the same time he said he understands Pakistani concerns .
 Ambassador Avereil Harriman and British Commonwealth Secretary Duncan Sandys were charged by their governments to undertake efforts for a Kashmir settlement . The negotiations took place in 1962-63 .
 Six rounds of meetings were held between December 1962 and May 1963 . Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, Minister for Industries, was leading the Pakistan side . Swaran Singh was leader of the Indian side .
 At the first meeting, which was held in Rawalpindi, India wasted much time on protesting against the Sino-Pakistan boundary agreement . The conclusion of the previous day had been announced .
 At the second round, in New Delhi in January, India took the position that they did not consider old proposals of any value . The Indian side did not take part in the first round of the World Cup .
 Swaran Singh refused to consider any solution that involved ascertaining the wishes of the people . He put forward a new excuse that if Kashmiri Muslims voted in Pakistan’s favour, the Hindus of India would consider their vote as proof of disloyalty to India .
 On the basis of this argument, amounting to the use of Indian Muslims as hostages to blackmail Pakistan and the Kashmiri people, he proposed a ‘political settlement’, implying partition .
 Pakistan was willing to probe the idea, provided a division was based on the composition of the population and acceptable to the people of the state, apart from safeguarding economic and strategic interests and defence requirements .
 The ‘political settlement’ idea was further discussed at the third round in February and the fourth round in March . The 'political settlement' idea was first discussed in February, March .
 The Indian side suggested division of the state along a boundary broadly corresponding to the ceasefire line, with minor adjustments and modifications .
 Pakistan indicated a willingness to consider division along the Pir Panjal watershed in northern Jammu . Pakistan would consider division of districts of Riasi, Mirpur and Poonch . The Pakistan side indicated it was willing to consider divisions along the border .
 India contended the Srinagar-Leh road was essential for defence of Ladakh against China . Pakistan offered to postpone implementation of the road . India contended it was essential to defence of the Ladakh region .
 It proposed ascertainment of the wishes of the people six months after withdrawal of Indian forces, placing the valley under international control in the interim . It also proposes ascertainment . of people's wishes after withdrawal from Indian forces .
 A similar suggestion was made earlier by Ayub Khan through Duncan Sandys . The idea was also made by Duncan .
 It envisaged placing the valley under international control for 5-10 years as an interim arrangement . The valley was envisaged to be placed in international control as a temporary arrangement .
 Ayub Khan told an American envoy that any compromise would be unpalatable to many people on both sides . Khan told U.S. envoy that many people would not agree to a compromise .
 Nehru had no incentive in giving even an impression of interest in a settlement with Pakistan . As the danger of a further flare-up on the border with China receded, Nehru was not interested .
 No progress was achieved at the fifth and sixth rounds in April and May . No progress has been achieved in the fifth, sixth and seventh rounds of the competition .
 Instead of narrowing differences, the positions of the two countries became divergent . The positions of both countries are divergent, according to CNN.com .
 Before the breakdown of talks, the two sides reverted to their original positions . The two sides had been in talks for more than two years .
 President Kennedy was keen to promote a Kashmir settlement . He tried to persuade Nehru to join in the effort . President Kennedy tried to convince Nehru .
 The priority he attached to this objective suffered as accelerating evolution in the strategic environment opened up opportunities of greater importance to the United States, he said . However, he added that this priority suffered .
 India emerged as an important factor in the global power and ideological contest . The value of the regional alliances in Asia was progressively diminishing, he says . India's influence in the region was fading, he said .
 The Sino-Indian border conflict in 1962 coincided with the Cuban missile crisis and emergent differences between USSR and China . The conflict coincided with a changing strategic environment in China and India .
 The United States saw in the Sino-Indian border clash an opportunity to court and wean India away from neutrality and the Soviet orbit . The U.S. saw in China’s border clash as a chance to court India and help wean it into the West’
 The time also seemed opportune to intensify pursuit of the other objective of building non-communist India as a rival to communist China and an example to other newly independent countries .
 At first the U.S. sought to assure Pakistan that aid to India would not be at the expense of Pakistan’s security or the aim of promoting a Kashmir settlement . At first, the United States sought to . assure Pakistan they would not . be at expense of security or
 The primary U.S. objective now is to strengthen India against China . Despite these reassuring declarations, it was evident that the primary United States objective now was to weaken India .
 President John Kennedy and Prime Minister Harold Wilson announced the decision to provide $120 million for military aid to India . The aid will help enable India to raise six additional divisions .
 Galbraith played a major part in the failure of the Kashmir talks, by advising Washington it should not allow the Kashmir issue to cause the U.S. to miss the opportunity to win over India .
 In view of Nehru’s role in the grab of Kashmir, firm and friendly counsel by Galbraith at 90 might have induced Nehru to consider a salutary reappraisal of his obduracy .
 By March 1963 little doubt had been left about the change in U.S. policy . The United States changed its policy in March 1963 .
 Kennedy and Macmillan decided to provide a United States-Commonwealth umbrella to India, to familiarize the Indian air force with supersonic fighter-bombers and plan for further military aid to strengthen India .
 The United States seemed to believe India could successfully compete with China for leadership of Asia . The U.S. seemed to think India could succeed in China's success .
 India's strategic thinkers failed to see that few countries in Asia would accept India’s leadership so long as it sought to pursue a hegemonic goal . Its strategic thinkers didn’t see that . few countries would accept Indian leadership so . long as India sought to . pursue
 The Indian proclivity to exploit power disparity in order to impose its own preferences on neighbours was responsible for vitiating its relations with them . The country's power disparity has led to a decline in relations with its neighbours .
 Had India played fair on a basis of universally recognised principles of inter-state relations, Pakistan could have been a natural friend of India . Pakistan's relationship with India should have been based on principles of international relations .
 They ignored the unilateral ceasefire and withdrawal of forces by China within days of the border clash, falsifying their premise of Chinese expansionism . They completely ignored a unilateral ceasefire .
 The United States was to pay a high price for that assumption in Vietnam . The U.S. paid a lot of time to assume responsibility for the U.N. mission to Vietnam .
 The U.S. thought withdrawal from Vietnam would have a domino effect . Similarly incorrect was the United States belief that withdrawal would have an effect on Vietnam withdrawal .
 As the United States policy was changing, so also, it should be added, was that of Pakistan . As the U.S. policy was changed, so was Pakistan's of Pakistan, it was added, as was the country's of Afghanistan .
 Pakistan's relations with China were amicable from the start, Pakistan took timely steps to remove possible irritants and enhance cooperation with this important neighbour, resisting U.S. pressures and sanctions .
 As early as 1959 Pakistan proposed demarcation of the Sino-Pakistan boundary . An agreement was concluded in 1962 . Pakistan and China agreed to demarcate the border .
 PLA enjoyed a virtual monopoly on the new corridor to China . The two countries also agreed to commence air services, and for years PLA enjoyed virtual monopoly .
 Pakistan extended an effusive welcome to Premier Zhou Enlai in February 1964 . Pakistan extended a warm welcome to the Chinese premier in 1964 .
 Pakistan took initiatives for normalisation of relations with the Soviet Union . Pakistan also took initiatives to normalise relations with Russia .
 On 1 October 1963, Pakistan allowed transit rights to the Soviet airline via Karachi via Karachi .
 Moscow proposed bilateral talks for improving relations with Russia . Moscow has offered bilateral talks to improve relations with the United States .
 President Ayubs visit to USSR in 1965 laid the foundation for President Ayub Ayub's visit . These began two months later and laid the groundwork for the visit .
 The increasing United States lurch towards India disturbed Pakistan . The increasing U.S. lurch was disturbed by Pakistan's growing influence .
 If Pakistan-US relations did not deteriorate more than they did it was partly because Pakistan valued the assistance the U.S. provided . The United States attached importance to the intelligence facilities in Peshawar, Pakistan says .
 President Kennedy was philosophical when he received the new Pakistan ambassador, G Ahmed, on 11 August 1963, saying, ‘We are conditioned by our history.’ President Kennedy said, 'We are conditioning ourselves to accept our history'
 George Ball, who was to visit Pakistan as Kennedy’s emissary, spoke with less understanding . Ball's visit to Pakistan was to be Kennedy's first trip to Pakistan .
 A year after ceasefire on the 92 Sino-India border, he still assumed China was intent on attacking India . He still assumed that China would attack India .
 He wanted Pakistan and India to join in 'common defence’ against China . He wanted the two countries to join forces together to fight China .
 Ayub Khan, on 4 September, asked what exactly Pakistan had in mind in its relations with China . Khan: Pakistan's relationship with China is one of the world's largest economies .
 Ayub Khan said it was normalisation and Pakistan wanted to reduce its political and military commitments, especially in view of the U.S. aid to India . Pakistan wants to reduce military and political and political commitments .
 The U.S. attitude towards Pakistan further stiffened after Lyndon Johnson succeeded John Kennedy .
 He took a tough line with Pakistan with regard to its developing relations with China . Pakistan has a long-standing dispute with China over its relations with Pakistan .
 Johnson sternly warned that Zhou Enlai’s upcoming visit to Pakistan would jeopardize U.S. economic and military aid to Pakistan . When he met Foreign Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who went to Washington to attend Kennedy's funeral .
 The warning was repeated through General Maxwell Taylor, Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff, who visited Pakistan in December 1963 . The warning of Pakistan in 1963 was repeated by General Taylor .
 Johnson wanted Ayub Khan to know that ‘Pakistan's flirtation with China was rapidly approaching the limits of American tolerance’ 44 The United States increased aid to India for 1963-64 to $100 million .
 Its confrontation with China was growing as war in Vietnam reinforced trends in U.S. policy in South Asia . Vietnam's conflict with China is a key factor in the United States' confrontation with the country .
 Pakistan's entente with China contradicted the U.S. plan for building a coalition of Asian countries against China . Washington became keener to build up India militarily against China, while Pakistan’s entente  contradicted the plan .
 De Gaulle’s decision to recognise the Peoples Republic on 27 January 1964 increased Washingtons sense of isolation on its China policy . The decision was made in 1964 .
 The proposal for a second summit of African and Asian countries placed the U.S. on edge as it apprehended criticism of its Vietnam policy . The United States has been criticized for its policy toward Vietnam .
 Pakistan considered Pakistan’s support for the second Bandung Conference as anti-American . Pakistan considered the second conference as an anti-U.S. ally in Indonesia . It considered Pakistan's support for second conference in Indonesia anti-America .
 Washington, once opposed to neutrality, now supports summit of non-aligned countries where China would be absent . Washington once was opposed to neutral neutrality . China would not attend the summit .
 U.S. aid to India would be modest—about $60 million a year, Taylor said . Taylor also informed Ayub Khan that United States aid was modest . Taylor told Khan that U.K. would only provide about $60million a year .
 Ayub Khan was concerned about the enhanced threat to Pakistan from India . He was concerned that India was engaged in a military expansion programme .
 Johnson’s response was even more curt, warning that the US would be obliged to re-examine its relations with Pakistan if it continued to develop relations with China .
 Ayub Khan’s Visits to China and the USSR were between 1965 and 1965 . Khan visited China in March 1965 .
 He held cordial meetings with Chairman Mao and Premier Zhou . He spoke of ‘lasting friendship and fruitful cooperation’ with China .
 The joint communique stressed adherence to the Ten Principles of Peaceful Coexistence . Condemns colonialism and racial discrimination .
 Kashmir dispute should be resolved in accordance with the wishes of the people of Kashmir as pledged to them by India and Pakistan, it said .
 Ayub Khan visited the USSR a month later, the first visit ever by a Pakistani head of state . A month after his visit, Ayub visited the Soviet Union, he visited Pakistan again .
 They could not explain why they were supplying arms to India if these were not intended for use against Pakistan .
 Kosygin agreed to consider Pakistan’s request for military equipment . In a separate meeting, Kosygen agreed to discuss Pakistan's request for equipment .
 At Pakistan’s behest, the communique was moderately worded, and refrained from referring to Vietnam . The communique, at Pakistan's behest, was moderate worded .
 Even the USSR expressed interest in attending the conference, claiming it was also an Asian country . Even the Soviet Union also expressed interest .
 As the date approached, apprehensions mounted in Washington that the conference, which North Vietnam would participate, would criticise U.S policy .
 In mid-April, a preparatory meeting of eighteen countries was held in Jakarta, Indonesia . The meeting is expected to take place in April .
 Most speakers condemned the United States bombing of North Vietnam . Most of the speakers condemned U.S. bombing of Vietnam .
 Foreign Minister Bhuttos statement was moderate but there could be no doubt of Pakistan’s sympathy . Pakistan has a history of sympathy for the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Pakistan had earlier declined to send even a token military contingent to join the U.S. armed forces in South Vietnam . Pakistan did not join the United States military forces in Vietnam .
 The Algiers summit was aborted because of the overthrow of Ahmed Ben Bella and a bbmb blast at the conference venue in Club des Pins . The summit had been due to take place in the city of Algier .
 President Ayub Khan’s visits to China and the USSR made no impression on Washington . Neither the scrupulous moderation of communiques issued following Ayub's visits made any impression .
 The administration was angered by the success of the Pakistan president’s visits . Instead of the administration being angered, it was angered that the president's visits were successful .
 It showed no interest in taking advantage of his contacts to open the door to negotiations for a Vietnam settlement . The US government has no intention of taking advantage .
 On 16 April he announced unilateral postponement of Ayub Khan’s visit to the U.S. due to begin nine days later . Ayub's visit to United States was postponed nine days after his visit .
 The U.S. advised the World Bank to defer the meeting of the Pakistan Consortium to pledge aid to Pakistan . In early July the United States RELATIONS WITH CHINA AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS 95 advised that the meeting should not be postponed .
 The Pakistan government did not bend in the face of U.S. pressure . The Pakistani government refused to back down, despite pressure from the United States . The United States did not back down in Pakistan .
 The U.S. base at Badaber may not be renewed by the government . Instead it considers refusal to renew the lease for the United States base there .
 RCD and IPECC Allies in CENTO, Iran, Pakistan and Turkey, began to feel the need to supplement and enlarge their one-dimensional military contacts . Allies in Iran, Iran and Pakistan were among them .
 A number of industrial projects were later established by two or all three parties agreeing to share in investment and production . The three parties agreed to share investment in industrial projects .
 RCD symbolised the aspiration of the people of the three countries for closer cooperation . Although the ioint projects were relatively small, they symbolised RCD .
 Both looked upon African-Asian solidarity as a better alternative to the formation of the non-aligned group, which excluded not only Iran, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, etc. but also China, the world’s largest and most important developing country .
 Zhou Enlai had out-shone Nehru as a statesman and leader of great acumen and sagacity at the Bandung Afro-Asian summit in 1955 . Soekarno well remembered, well remembered for his role in Indonesia .
 Pakistan and Indonesia realized, moreover, that India nourished hegemonic ambitions . Pakistan as well as Indonesia realized it was India's hegemonessess ambitions .
 The two countries cooperated closely in preparations for the second Afro-Asian summit . They cooperated with each other in preparation for the summit .
 Indonesia-Pakistan Economic and Cultural Cooperation was formed in August 1965 . Indonesia and Pakistan agreed to form an economic and cultural cooperation in 1965 . The two countries have shared multiple commonalties of interest .
 IPECC, like RCD, has continued to provide a forum for the promotion of cooperation despite changes in the two countries . The two countries have been at odds for years .
 Summit conference was attended by India, Indonesia, Myanmar, Pakistan and Sri Lanka . Convened to support de-colonisation of Indo-China, summit conference was held in New Delhi .
 Ayub said Chinese activities in Tibet and road building in Afghanistan posed a serious threat from the north . On 9 November 1959, Reuter reported Ayub to have said Chinese activity in Tibet was a threat to Afghanistan .
 Gauhar, op. dt, 245. United States Embassy, Karachi, press release of September 1963, quoted in . September 1963 . Gauhar: "The U.S. government has been in touch with the world since September 1963"
 Wodd Bank statement clarified procedure following Pakistan's reference of the Baglihar issue, Down, Islamabad . Bank statement said the procedure was clarified following the reference .
 Neville Maxwell, India’s China War, and Stevan A Hoffmann, India and the China Crisis, are two well-known works on Sino-Indian relations . Neville Maxwell is known for his work on India and China relations .
 Maqbool A Bhatty, Great Powers and South Asia, 105, from Maxwell. Quoted in Maqbal A Bhhatty's book, "Great Powers and Asia"
 Quoted from John Kenneth Galbraith, Ambassador's Journal, in Gauhar, op. ciL, 207. Quoted .
 The ship was considered by India as a symbol of U.S. hostility when it was sent by Nixon in December 1971 . Ironically, the same ship was seen as symbol of United States hostility by India in 1971 .
 Kennedy's letter of 28 October 1962 to Ayub, quoted in Kux, op. cit., 205, is quoted as 205 . Kennedy: "I want to make it clear that Ayub is not a dictator, not a president."
 Ambassador Aziz Ahmed was of the view that it would have been out of character for Pakistan to stab India in the back; also that would have left an intensely bitter trail, besides antagonising the big powers .
 Yusuf Buch suggested in his paper ‘Kashmir and the Big Powers’ presented at the International Seminar on Fifty Years of Kashmir Dispute, at Muzaffarabad on 24 August 1997 . He was the author of the paper, which was presented in Muz
 R K McKEE:gn, dated 23 May 1977, quoted by Altaf Gohar in Ayub Khan, 196, Footnote 1 . Footnote: "R K:gn" is quoted as a reference to the assassination of Chibibar Khan .
 United States Memo of Kennedy-Shoaib meeting, 9 October 1963, quoted in McMahon, op. cit., 303. U.S. Memo: "Kennedy and Shoaib met in October 1963"
 Ayub and Nehru announced on 29 November 1962 . A statement to that effect by Ayub . Nehru and Ayub was announced in a joint statement .
 Bhutto was ‘deeply upset and disturbed 1 at the discourtesy shown to him’ gleefully noted Talbott. ‘Deeply upset’ and ‘disgusted’ at the ‘ discourtesy’ shown to the former prime minister .
 The Pakistan-India ‘Kashmir’ war in 1965 was the culmination of a process of the rise and fall of expectations of a peaceful settlement of the Kashmir dispute . Popular agitation and state repression in the India-held state, jingoism triggered by border clashes in the
 Leaders on both sides seemed to have lost control over actions decided under pressure, provoking like reactions . The build-up of momentum that pushed them into an unwanted war neither side had planned had been planned .
 The fundamental cause of tensions lay in the failure to settle the festering Kashmir dispute . Kashmir dispute has been a source of tension in Kashmir for decades .
 The ceasefire in the state was defined in the 1949 Security Council resolution as the first step toward the holding of a plebiscite under UN auspices to determine the question of the accession of the state .
 Resolution constituted an international agreement requiring Implementation by the parties . Accepted by Pakistan as well as India, the resolution was accepted by Pakistan and India .
 Agreement on the quantum of troops India could retain in the state proved impossible . Agreement was reached on how many troops India would retain in state .
 Prime Minister Nehru began using the assistance Pakistan might receive as representing a change in the situation, though how that could affect the rights of the people of the state defied logic . Even before Pakistan signed a defence assistance agreement with the U.S.
 India invented the argument that if the Muslims of Kashmir opted to accede to Pakistan that would trigger a Hindu backlash and massacre of Indian Muslims . Then India invented an argument that . If the Muslims . of Kashmir . accede . to Pakistan, it would trigger the Hindu backlash, massacre of
 Another pretext was that continued hold over Kashmir was a necessity for maintaining the integrity of India; otherwise, its unity would be destroyed . Another pretext for refusal to implement the resolution was that it was necessary to maintain India's unity .
 The pledge to the people of the state and to the United Nations was relegated, as India sought to freeze the status quo . In the THE PAKISTAN-INDIA WAR. 99 process, the pledge was relegated to the U.N. pledge .
 Expectations rose in 1962, as a result of American and British intercession with India during the Sino-Indian border clash that purposeful negotiations between Pakistan and India might lead to an acceptable settlement .
 It was assumed that in order to avert a two-front danger, India would see the need for resolving the Kashmir dispute .
 Nehru’s initial panicky reaction to border clash fostered hope that India might do so . Nehru's initial reaction to the border clash led to hope that it might .
 New Delhi realized that Nehru’s fear that the border clash was a prelude to a Chinese invasion of India, was exaggerated . New Delhi soon realized that the fear was exaggerated. New Delhi eventually realized that New Delhi's fears were exaggerated .
 Instead of focusing on outlines of Kashmir settlement, India diverted attention to Pakistan’s boundary agreement with China . The talks were meant to focus on the outlines of a Kashmir settlement .
 Evidently it sought to diffuse issues, relegating the negotiations to an exercise in public relations . Evidently the negotiations were meant to be a public relations exercise, rather than an exercise .
 The urgency gone, the U.S. and Britain, too, lost interest in pushing India towards a Kashmir settlement . The urgency went, the United States and Britain lost interest .
 To that end they announced a programme for massive supply of sophisticated weapons for India . The weapons programme is aimed at India .
 Instead of inducing flexibility into India’s stance on Kashmir, Washington and London emboldened India to revert to rigidity . The U.S. and London have emboldened the Indian government to reinstate its stance on the issue .
 Opinion in Pakistan blames Ayub Khan for falling into a trap and missing the opportunity for action to achieve a breakthrough towards a settlement of Kashmir in conformity with their aspirations . Opinion now blames him for falling in a trap .
 Pakistani disappointment over the failed talks was soon followed by anger when India initiated legal manoeuvres to erode the disputed status of Kashmir . Pakistan was angered by India's attempts to erode the disputed status of Kashmir in 1963 .
 The puppet prime minister of the state, Bakhshi Ghulam Mohammad, was installed by New Delhi and sustained in power through rigged elections . New Delhi announced changes in the constitution of Kashmir designed to bring Kashmir on a par with the states of India .
 The head of government of Jammu and Kashmir would no longer be called prime minister but chief minister . Also, the head of the government would not be called Prime Minister but Chief Minister . The move was announced in a joint statement by the state legislature .
 Kashmiri people launched an agitation which assumed massive proportions following the theft of moo-e-muqaddis from the Hazratbal shrine . Pakistan protested, denouncing the proposed changes as ‘clearly illegal’ and a ‘flagrant violation of India’s
 Kashmiri.people poured out in a spontaneous eruption . Attributing the crime to Indian connivance, the Kashmiri .people poured . out in spontaneous eruption.
 Demonstrations of unprecedented proportions were held in cities and towns across the occupied valley . Demonstration was held in unprecedented proportions in cities, towns and cities across the valley .
 Even after the Indian authorities announced the recovery of the relic, the agitation did not cease .
 Kashmiri people demanding an opportunity to exercise their right of self-determination . Instead of political direction, it took a political direction with the Kashmir people demanding a political opportunity .
 Kashmir was in the grip of a crisis in the months following December 1963 . The administration was in collapse and India resorting to repression against the unarmed Kashmiri people .
 Pakistan appealed to the UN Security Council, which held lengthy debates in February and May 1964, but was prevented by the threat of a Soviet veto . Pakistan was prevented from taking any effective action but even from reaffirming its previous resolutions .
 This failure on the part of the apex organ of the U.N. was yet another blow to prospects of peace between Pakistan and India . This failure is a blow to peace between the two countries .
 Hopes rose again in April 1964 when Nehru decided to release Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah, the dismissed and imprisoned former prime minister of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir .
 Called the ‘Lion of Kashmir’ for leading popular protests against the oppressive rule of the maharaja in the 1930s, he was once again considered a leader of stature capable of bringing peace to the troubled state .
 Whether Nehru wanted only to use Abdullah again merely to pacify the Kashmiri people or to divert international opinion, remains unclear . Whether he wanted to appease his friend and ally, Nehru had come round to realize there was no escaping a settlement .
 Abdullah, however, believed that Nehru wished for a resolution that might satisfy the Kashmiri people . Abdullah said Nehru believed that a resolution might satisfy him . Abdullah believed Nehru wanted a resolution to satisfy the people of Kashmir .
 The assessment that India was inclined to settle the Kashmir question was encouraged by the public stance taken by Jayaprakash Narayan, a leader respected in India for his advocacy of morality in politics . The assessment is encouraged by Narayan's public stance .
 In a courageous article 2 he exploded some of the myths India had fostered . In this article he explodes some of India's myths .
 Narayan: The highly suspect elections held by India in Kashmir did not represent a vote for integration with India . Narayan argued that the highly suspect election results were not a vote to integrate with India, he said .
 He ridiculed the argument that self-determination by the people of Kashmir would trigger countrywide communal rioting and prove a prelude to the disintegration of India .
 He argued that it was not only silly but implied that India was held together by force . He said it was silly and that it implied that the country would be held together .
 Narayan advocated that India should rethink its position in the light of not only its own interests but also those of Pakistan . Narayan: India's position in Pakistan's interest should be taken into account .
 He led Ayub Khan to believe that Nehru and India were sincere in wanting a settlement . Nehru suggested that Ayub should visit New Delhi for a meeting with Nehru, Ayub agreed .
 The next day, 27 May, Nehru died, and with him perished yet another hope . Nehru was one of India's greatest hopes .
 The new Indian prime minister, Lai Bahadur Shastri publicly pledged to continue Nehru’s policy . But he did not follow up Abdullah’�s suggestion for Ayub Khan’‘Visit to India’ .
 A brief meeting between Shastri and Ayub Khan at Karachi airport on 12 October 1964 went off without promise of progress . A meeting between the two leaders was held in Karachi airport in October 1964 .
 In December 1964, the Indian government resumed moves aimed at the merger of Kashmir with India . The application of the Indian constitution enabled it to impose presidential rule and extend Indian laws to Kashmir .
 The Rann of Kutch is a low-lying marsh wedged between the province of Sindh and the Indian state of Gujarat that floods during the monsoon season . It was the subject of dispute since before 1947 between the princely state and the Bombay presidency . Kutch was the
 An area of about 3,500 square miles north of the 24 th parallel was contested . The boundary was not demarcated .
 After Independence, India claimed the entire territory and in 1956 sent its forces to seize the Chhad Bet high ground . In 1956, India seized the high ground in the area .
 In violation of the agreement, the Indian forces advanced to the north in January 1965, and tried to establish new posts and obstruct Pakistani patrols in the disputed area . The Indian forces then tried to set up new posts, obstruct Pakistan patrols .
 Pakistan sent in troops to stop India from solving the dispute unilaterally by force by force . Pakistan has been in talks with India for years to resolve the Kashmir dispute .
 As both sides strengthened forces in the Rann, fighting flared up in April . Both sides strengthened their forces in April as fighting intensified .
 The Pakistani forces surrounded the Indian contingent and could have captured it but President Ayub ordered restraint . The Indian contingent was surrounded by the Pakistani forces but could've captured it . President Ayubs ordered restraint and ordered restraint.
 The danger of further escalation was averted partly due to the approaching monsoon . The danger has now been averted by the approaching the approaching monsoon .
 British government persuaded the two sides to agree to a ceasefire on 1st May . More importantly, the British government agreed to a truce with the rebels .
 Indirect but intense negotiations were held through British high commissioners Morrice James and John Freemen in New Delhi .
 Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed ensured that the agreement, signed on 30 June 1965, provided for a time-bound, selfexecuting mechanism for settlement .
 The agreement gave two months for the two sides to try to resolve the issue through bilateral negotiation . The two sides have been given two months to work on the issue .
 If that failed they would submit the dispute to arbitration by arbitration by a tribunal, to be constituted within four months, with the UN Secretary General designating its chairman . The tribunal will be constituted by the Secretary General .
 Pakistan satisfied that the dispute was honourably resolved . Interestingly, Pakistan was satisfied with the resolution of the dispute . Pakistan was also satisfied that it had been resolved .
 India got 90 per cent of the disputed territory but was still indignant . India got the most of the territory, but was indignant that it was not enough .
 Always wanting to settle disputes on its own terms, it vowed never again to accept third-party mediation or impartial adjudication .
 The demonstrated inefficacy of negotiations where one party seeks to impose its own preferred solution on the other has been illustrated over and over again in Pakistan-India disputes . Even in comparatively minor disputes including that involving the residual issue of Sir Creek at the western terminus of the boundary in the
 Officials of the two countries have held innumerable meetings over three decades but failed to agree on the boundary in the creek, entailing endless suffering for poor fishermen from both sides .
 Hundreds of people are arrested in recurrent cases of trespass and spend long periods in prison losing their boats to confiscation . Hundreds of them spend long time in prison . Hundreds are arrested and lose their boats in repeated cases of trespassing .
 In normal circumstances the agreement to settle the Kutch dispute peacefully might have contributed to improvement of Pakistan-India relations .
 India fuming over what it perceived to be a reverse in the Rann of Kutch . India fumed over the incident in the state of Rann .
 Prime Minister Shastri threatened that India would fight Pakistan at a time and place of its own choosing . In a statement on 29 April, he threatened to fight Pakistan .
 The Kutch clash, by making India want to settle a score and Pakistan over-confident, proved to be one further stumble toward war, which came within five months, as the Kashmir cauldron came again to the boil .
 At the same time as domestic opinion was fired up by clashes and jingoistic statements, international restraints were weakened . At the time, domestic public opinion was on the rise in Russia .
 India was vehement in protest against the use of American weapons by Pakistan . India felt free to use Soviet as well as American weapons against Pakistan .
 Washington announced an embargo on the further supply of arms or spare parts . Washington announced the embargo on further supplies of arms .
 Pakistan's equipment was mostly of United States origin . India's arsenal was mainly of Soviet origin . The restriction had little impact on India's weapons .
 President Johnson ordered discontinuation of any additional U.S. aid or loans . Johnson also ordered discontinuing any additional United States aid or . loans .
 The World Bank Consortium for India had already met and the United States had pledged aid . The meeting of the Consortium for Pakistan, which was scheduled for later, had to be postponed . The decision contributed to a mood of desperation in Pakistan .
 Abdullah and his colleague, Mirza Afzal Beg, leader of the Plebiscite Front, were arrested in May 1965 on their return from abroad . They had met with leaders of Muslim countries during Haj and with Premier Zhou Enlai in Cairo .
 Mirwaiz Mohammad Farooq, leader of the Awami Action Committee, joins Gandhi-style non-violent disobedience movement . The Indian moves triggered another popular upsurge in Kashmir . Mirwais Mohammad Faroq has joined a non-violence movement .
 Popular uprisings in occupied Kashmir and their brutal repression by India . The rise and fall of hopes for a settlement through peaceful means, fostered mounting frustration in Pakistan .
 Official thought in the latter part of 1964 turned to what else might be done to thaw the situation and jolt the world community into recognizing the urgency of fulfilling the pledge .
 Pakistan and the U.N. to let the Kashmiri people themselves determine their future . Pakistan and United Nations should let the people decide their future, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 President Ayub Khan, too, was exasperated by India’s refusal to agree to a peaceful settlement of the Kashmir question . Ayub was frustrated with India's refusal to settle the Kashmir issue .
 He was moved by the heroic struggle of the people of Algeria and Vietnam, and his and the army’s confidence grew after the encounter in the Rann of Kutch, though he was still averse to war .
 He appointed a group of high-ranking officials to suggest appropriate means . However, he has appointed a number of high ranking officials .
 Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed chairs the Kashmir Publicity Committee . Chaired by the Foreign Secretary it was called the Kashmir publicity committee . Aziz is a former member of the Foreign Office .
 The operation named Gibraltar was approved by Major General Akhtar Hussain Malik . Major General Malik was the author of the operation .
 Calling for incursions by Kashmiri volunteers into India-held Kashmir, it was based on three assumptions . People in Kashmir would rise to support the guerrillas, a large-scale Indian offensive against Azad Kashmir was unlikely, and the possibility of attack across the international border could be
 Kashmiri people had not been informed or prepared for an uprising . Poorly equipped for survival in the cold and desolate conditions in the high mountains on the way, they were not joined .
 Guerrillas inflicted heavy damage on the Indian forces . Nevertheless, the guerrillas were able to inflict heavy damage . The Indian forces suffered heavy losses in the battle .
 Indian authorities mount a major offensive across the ceasefire line and occupy a large territory in the Kargil area in the north and the Haji Pir Pass between Uri and Poonch, posing a threat to Muzaffarabad, the capital of Azad Kashmir .
 It decided to launch an attack in the Chamb area from Pakistan territory . The Taliban launched an attack on Pakistan territory from the Pakistani territory .
 Actions and reactions led step by step inexorably, to a war neither side had planned . Neither side planned to attack each other, and the war was never planned .
 The Indian forces crossed the international boundary before dawn on 6 September . The border was the first time the Indian forces had crossed it .
 The offensive aimed at the capture of Lahore, Pakistan’s second largest city, twenty miles from the Indian border .
 The Pakistan army was caught unprepared but legendary acts of heroism and sacrifice halted the Indian thrust . The Pakistani forces were caught unprepared and were forced to withdraw .
 The small but highly professional Pakistan air force went on the offensive and attacked a number of Indian bases on the evening of 6 September, inflicting severe losses . Pakistan's small but professional air force inflicted severe losses on Indian bases .
 The Indian air force launched a counter-attack on 8 September but was checkmated . The attack was the first of its kind in Afghanistan . The Indian Air Force launched the counter-attacked in September .
 Bangladesh bombed India in retaliation for Indian bombing of Dhaka and Chittagong . It took the battle into enemy airspace, bombing targets in India . It was the first time the country had taken action against India .
 Over a few days, the PAF shot down seventy-five Indian aircraft for the loss of nineteen of its own, clearing the Pakistani airspace . Over the same period, the Indian aircraft were shot down by the Pakistani military .
 Pakistan army launched a major offensive in the Khem Karan area towards Amritsar on 9 September . On 9 September, the Pakistan army attacked the city in a major operation .
 The armoured division made good progress but then became bogged down . The Indian forces flooded the countryside by breaching an irrigation canal .
 The biggest tank battle of the war was fought in the Chawinda area . It contained the Indian advance aimed at cutting off Wazirabad, a communications nodal point .
 Pakistan's armed forces can be legitimately proud of their performance in the war . Considering the disparity of size and resources between the two countries and their force levels, the Pakistani armed forces should be proud of the performance . The Pakistanis are still fighting in the Afghan War .
 Pakistan made marginally larger territorial gains in the war but the war ended in a stalemate . The war ended with a draw-and-decade stalemate between Pakistan and India . Pakistan made some larger territorial gain 8 but war ended at stalemate 8 .
 Neither this nor the resolution of 6 September was acceptable to Pakistan, Pakistan says . Neither this or the resolution, 6 September, was acceptable, says Pakistan .
 Ayub Khan said a ‘purposeful’ resolution must provide for a self-executing arrangement for settlement of Kashmir dispute . Secretary General U Thant asked for implementation of the ceasefire .
 India, on its part, was willing to order a ceasefire but not to withdraw from areas in Kashmir . India has said it is not willing to withdraw its troops from Kashmir areas .
 Beijing issued a strong protest against Indian 'acts of aggression and provocation’ along China’s border . On 27 August, Beijing said it would not tolerate Indian 'act of aggression' and provocation' along China's border .
 The threat of expansion of the war served to inject a sense of urgency into the deliberations of the Security Council . The U.N. Security Council discussed the possibility of expanding the conflict .
 It passed a resolution on 20 September which went beyond earlier resolutions . The resolution was passed by the House of Representatives in New York .
 Not all of Ayub Khans advisers agreed but the armed forces, running short of ordnance and spares, favoured immediate acceptance . The armed forces were already running out of ammunition and ammunition .
 In accepting the resolution, Pakistan attached weight to the promise given by the U.N. that it would contribute to the building of permanent peace by promoting a settlement of the ‘underlying’ of the Kashmir, dispute .
 In making this pledge, the Council was not moved by Pakistani negotiating strength or the inherent logic of the proposition .
 The great powers were concerned about the danger of expansion of the war . China issued one warning after another to India in the context of the Sino-Indian border problems as well as border problems .
 Foreign Minister Chen Yi and the Chinese foreign ministry used vivid language to manifest their friendship . Chen Yi: "We are very close friends. We are very supportive of each other"
 China prepared to fly in the material by fighter aircraft . Apart from providing munitions and spare parts, China was prepared to provide spare parts .
 Ayub Khan, apprehending adverse reaction from the United States, asked for their supply by sea . Khan's request was rejected by the U.S. Khan .
 The available record does not indicate that Pakistani leaders gave any advance consideration to the applicability of the alliances in the event of war with India . Pakistani leaders did not give any consideration to considering alliances with India, it says .
 One obvious explanation for the omission could be that they did not anticipate Indian aggression, projecting the conflict to remain confined to the state . The omission is an obvious explanation .
 Not sanguine about assistance by the allies, they made a belated and half-hearted attempt to invoke the alliances, realising that not all the allies agreed that India was the aggressor .
 SEATO council did not meet even for consultations and CENTO could not be activated . CENTO was not activated even for consultation or consultations . SeatO council was unable to meet for consultations .
 The UK backtracked after India raised a storm over Prime Minister Wilson’s criticism of Indian aggression . The UK backed down after the row over Wilson's criticism .
 The United States response to the outbreak of war between Pakistan and India was one of frustration . The U.S. response was frustrated by the conflict in Pakistan .
 Pakistan and India used US-supplied arms to fight each other rather than against its enemies . U.S. adopted a neutral, hands-off stance, leaving it to the Security Council to promote an end to the war .
 Pakistan foreign minister protested that the United States cut off defence supplies . U.S. ambassador said he considered Pakistan to have provoked the war . Pakistan's foreign minister said the US decision to cut supplies amounted to punitive action .
 The United States view that it was not bound to come to Pakistan’s assistance provoked a predictable Pakistani reaction of betrayal . The U.S. view that . it was . not bound . to come . to Pakistan's assistance provoked the Pakistani reaction, the writer says .
 President Johnson did not respond to Ayub Khan’s public appeal, on 13 September, to play a role to establish peace in the region . What stirred Washington a few days later was China's ultimatum to India, China's .
 The United States and Britain then began to play an active role in the Security Council in order to secure a ceasefire . They promised that they would promote an urgent settlement of the Kashmir question . The U.S. and Britain played a role in securing a ceasefire in Kashmir .
 Washington did not interpret the Indian attack as ‘aggression’ and did not agree that it was bound to come to Pakistan’s assistance .
 Pakistan had higher expectations of its ally than were founded in the legalistic wordings of the agreements . However, Pakistan had high expectations of the ally .
 Foreign Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto argued strongly that the spirit of the existing agreements required the U.S. to help Pakistan in the face of Indian aggression .
 Islamabad laid emphasis on the main clauses of the agreements . Omitting the conditions and qualifications specified in the agreements, Islamabad lays emphasis on main clauses .
 Once again the U.S. let Pakistan down just as it had done by providing massive military aid to India and failing to use its leverage for promoting Kashmiri settlement in 1962 . Now, once again the United States had let Pakistan .
 President Soekarno of Indonesia readily agreed to provide some MIG aircraft . Indonesia has also agreed to help provide some of the aircraft .
 Iran and Turkey provided planeloads of arms and ammunition . The two CENTO allies could not send equipment imported from the United States because of American restrictions on transfer to another country .
 The United States embargoed the supply of defence equipment, including spare parts, that constrained Pakistan because most of its war weapons were of United States origin . Most of Pakistan's war weapons are from the U.S.
 No country blamed Pakistan for its attempt to thaw the festering Kashmir dispute . A large number of countries criticised India for aggression across international border . Several provided memorable assistance to Pakistan .
 Prime Minister Kosygin ‘took exception’ to India’s crossing the international border,’ reflecting a change in its erstwhile blanket support to India .
 Only Yugoslavia sided with India, and the Malaysian representative in the Security Council, a person of Indian origin, made remarks so offensive as to provoke Pakistan to cut off diplomatic relations . Pakistan cut diplomatic relations with India after the remarks .
 Pakistan was at first averse to a ceasefire without a UN commitment to promoting a settlement of the Kashmir question . Pakistan was initially averse at first to the ceasefire without the UN commitment .
 President Ayub Khan decided to accept the resolution adopted by the Security Council on 20 September . The resolution was adopted in a vote by the United Nations . Ayub's government accepted the resolution .
 Not for the first time did the Security Council fail to pursue its decision, however . The Security Council failed to pursue the decision .
 The Tashkent Declaration was made by Soviet diplomacy to promote a post-war settlement . Both the U.S. and the UK were reluctant to take initiative .
 Prime Minister Kosygin offered his good offices to work for a settlement between Pakistan and India . Pakistan and the Indian Republic will meet in Islamabad to discuss a settlement .
 Pakistan was initially reluctant, entertaining misgivivings on account of the Soviet Union’s pro-India policy ever since Pakistan joined the western alliances . Pakistan initially joined the west alliances with the West .
 Moscow agreed to accept the proposal because there was no alternative on offer . Moscow was less partisan in recent years, and Moscow is now less partisan . Russia accepted the proposal not only because it had no alternative .
 Ayub Khan’s visit to Moscow the previous April ended on a positive note, with the Soviet leaders pleased to be told that Pakistan intended to terminate the lease for Badaber .
 Moscow now had a stake in ensuring disengagement between Pakistan and India, and thus prevent a dangerous polarisation between China and the Soviet Union, one backing Pakistan and the other India . Also, Moscow now has a stake .
 Ayub Khan visited London and Washington in December . He has visited Tashkent, Washington and London in recent months .
 Johnson told him that the alliance between the U.S. and Pakistan was over . Johnson said that the United States and Pakistan were no longer an alliance .
 The United States might provide economic aid to Pakistan in future, but that would hinge on Pakistan’s willingness to curtail its ties with China . The U.S. might help Pakistan curtail China's ties with Pakistan .
 It became evident that Washington had decided to lower its profile in South Asia . Washington has also decided to reduce its presence in the region .
 It was not illogical to hope that the Soviet Union would work for progress in that direction . The Soviet Union did, and it did, but it was not the only one to hope for progress .
 Some believed Pakistan could get India to agree to the creation of a mechanism for settlement . Pakistan believed India would agree to a mechanism to create a settlement mechanism .
 Others were of the view that neither did the stalemated war permit Pakistan to adopt a strong negotiating posture, nor the Soviet Union be expected to pressurise India to agree to settle the Kashmir dispute .
 The Tashkent Declaration provided for withdrawal of forces to positions held on 5 August 1965 . It provided for repatriation of prisoners of war, and return of high commissioners to their posts .
 Pakistan’s effort to include a provision for compulsory settlement of the dispute was opposed by India . India opposed the Pakistan-India pact . Pakistan's efforts to include compulsory settlement was opposed .
 Prime Minister Shastri told Ayub Khan that as a ‘pygmy succeeding a giant’ his position did not permit him to change India’s stance .
 The Soviets, too, considered the Kashmir question too ‘complicated’ and the Pakistani demand impractical . The Soviets considered the issue too 'complicated' and impractical .
 Ayub Khan’s agreement to this formulation, though eminently rational under the circumstances, was to spark a bitter controversy in Pakistan . Ayub's agreement to the formulation of this formulation in the 1970s sparked a bitter debate in Pakistan.
 Official propaganda during the war had built up an impression of Pakistani forces having gained great advantage, if not victory, over India . Official propaganda had been built up to an impression that Pakistani forces had won the war .
 It was difficult enough to understand why Pakistan accepted the ceasefire when Pakistan was doing so well . Pakistan is doing well in the region, says Dr. Ghaffar Hussain .
 Even more baffling was the failure to secure any advance toward a settlement of the Kashmir dispute . The Kashmir dispute has never been resolved in Kashmir .
 The Tashkent Declaration came as an anti-climax to the high hopes that propaganda had built up . The Declaration was the first of its kind .
 It exposed Ayub Khan to baseless accusations of squandering at the negotiating table what the armed forces had won on the battlefield . The armed forces won on battlefield. It was exposed .
 The cover was torn apart at the first meeting held between their foreign ministers at Rawalpindi in 1966 . The cover of the two countries' first meeting in 1966 tore apart .
 The Indian side did not agree, joining only in the statement that ‘all disputes’ should be resolved . The Indian team said that 'all disputes' should be settled .
 Bhutto, this meant India was willing to hold discussions for settlement of Kashmir dispute . This meant India would be willing to talk about settlement of the Kashmir dispute, Bhuttto said . Bhuttto: This was India's willingness to negotiate Kashmir dispute settlement .
 Swaran Singh said India was willing to discuss any dispute including Kashmir . But he said India's sovereignty over Kashmir was not negotiable . Singh: Kashmir is not a matter of sovereignty .
 The stalemate illustrated the futility of further meetings which were, therefore, not held . It was decided not to hold further meetings at the summit .
 Pakistan's policy of alliances in the 1950s could not detract from Nehru’s pledges and the UN resolutions recognising the right of the people of Kashmir to self-determination . Neither the 1965 war nor the Tashkent Declaration could be a valid reason for depriving them
 Their restlessness has been demonstrated in recurrent outbreaks of protests and agitation . The restlessness of the protesters has been evident in recent years .
 Kosygin was disappointed at the lack of progress in Pakistan-India relations . He was disappointed with the lack progress in the relationship between Pakistan and India . Kosygen was disappointed by the lack in progress in relations with India .
 Not for the first time, India ignored an earnest and reasonable appeal . India ignored the earnest, reasonable appeal. India ignored it first .
 Controversy continues to envelop history in a fog that has only thickened with contradictory claims and disclaimers by former officials . Controversies continue to envelop the history in the fog .
 The records of the period have not been released and it is even doubtful they exist . It is doubtful that any of the records of that period exist .
 Ayub Khan initially rejected the plan for sending armed volunteers into Indian-held Kashmir because it involved unacceptable risk . Khan was a cautious military leader who rejected the idea .
 He still believed incursions would not trigger a war . Although he later agreed, he still believed the incursions wouldn't trigger a conflict .
 Air Marshal Asghar Khan who had led the air force for eight years was allowed to retire on 23 July, two weeks before incursions began across the ceasefire line . Air Marshal Khan had been in charge of the Afghan Air Force for 8 years .
 Air Marshal Nur Khan had been away from the force for six years . He had been seconded to Pakistan International Airlines .
 Neither the air force nor the navy was informed of Operation Gibraltar . The army did not prepare for the contingency of war . It is further evidence of his anti-war intentions .
 Asghar Khan emerges as 'kind, intelligent and shrewd' but not logical . Ayub Khan was 'kind and intelligent' but 'not logical' as Khan's first president . Khan was assassinated in March 1968 .
 Some of his critics go to the extent of thinking he was devious . But he, too, does not emerge as a farsighted strategist, says CNN's John Sutter .
 They accuse him of deliberately misleading Ayub Khan to believe that in the existing global and regional situation the conflict would remain confined to Kashmir . They say he deliberately misled him to believe in the current global and . regional situation .
 Other critics attribute the blunder to ‘foreign affairs experts’ who were alleged to have given a similar assessment . Other critics say foreign affairs experts gave the assessment .
 Ayub Khan as well as his apologists as naive analysts, should be faulted for not accepting the assessment given .
 The decision to send armed volunteers across the ceasefire line, however limited its scope, was bound to provoke a reaction . The inescapable fact is that the decision was bound for a reaction, however .
 If Bhutto and ‘foreign affairs experts’ failed to foresee the consequences, they were not the only ones to do so, they also did so . If you have contemplated the consequences of Pakistan’s nuclear deal, please contact us on Twitter @dailymail .
 Nor is it dear whether or not they had access to the details of the plan, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Foreign Secretary Aziz Ahmed told the author at the time of the war that he was taken aback by reports in the press .
 Kutch victory in Kutch misled some to believe Indian political leadership was not bold enough to pick up the gauntlet . But hubris fostered by the battle victory in the battle won’t have stopped some from believing the Indian political leaders were bold enough .
 Whatever preparations made for the contingency of war were too little, too late . Whatever preparations were made, it was too little to prepare for war, says President Obama .
 Still another month passed before it was decided to raise one additional infantry division . The decision was made to raise an additional division in October .
 Some blamed the finance minister, Mohammad Shoaib, for ‘myopic’ opposition to the army’s proposal for two divisions . It is unclear if he was privy to the decision to send armed volunteers .
 Commanders-in-chiefs of the air force and navy were not even informed of the fateful decision . The decision was made without the knowledge of the decision .
 Not only were mines not laid on the border with India, but those laid during the Kutch crisis were removed . The mines were removed from the border during that crisis .
 It was later said influential retired or serving generals with lands in the area complained that the mines were obstructing agricultural operations on their lands .
 Disappointment at the failure of Western allies during the war hastened the process of reappraisal of Pakistan’s policy of alliances . Pakistan embarked upon efforts for the normalisation of relations with China and the Soviet Union in 1960 .
 The attempt by the U.S. and Britain to use the alliances to advance their own interests during the Sino-Indian border dash in 1962 had also served to disillusion Pakistan .
 Pakistan decided on a policy of lowering its profile in the Cold War . Pakistan had neither the capacity nor any reason to get mixed up in the wrangling of the great powers .
 The new policy sought to distance Pakistan from the West and open windows to the East . Termed ‘bilateralism,’ the new policy in effect sought . Pakistan has a long history of tension with the West .
 Pakistan also resisted the antiWest bias of some of the prominent non-aligned countries . Pakistan hopes to cultivate new friends without offending the existing ones .
 Bhutto tried to elaborate this idea and make it into a doctrine in international relations . But, as often happens, artificial innovations pass away with their authors . Bhuttto: "As often happens to happen, artificial innovation pass away .
 Atal Bihari Vajpayee: "Our unity would be destroyed. Our unity would have been destroyed" Atal: "We would never be able to live together again if we were united"
 The award allocated to Pakistan narrow—up to eight miles deep—stretches of land that surface after the flood season along the northern edge of the Rann . India received the rest of the area, mostly marshy area .
 Aziz Ahmed told the author in 1965 that he was taken completely by surprise when be read newspaper reports on 9 August to the effect that a large number of armed volunteers had crossed the border . Apparently, be expected the number to be smaller .
 The 1965 war precipitated adverse changes in Pakistan's relations with CENTO and SEATO allies who had never endorsed Pakistan’s contention that the alliances could be invoked against aggression by a non-communist state .
 The U.S. and Britain all but discontinued cooperation with both countries . The United States and Britain were frustrated that their military assistance was wasted in a war between two states .
 Neither was disposed to get involved in promoting a peace settlement between Pakistan and India, and let the Soviet Union take up a role that they had earlier reserved for themselves .
 Pakistan's acceptance of the Security Council’s demand for a ceasefire surprised Chinese leaders . But after Ayub Khan explained Pakistan's constraints 1 they, as usual, showed understanding of Pakistan .
 An engaging characteristic, which has distinguished Chinese leaden, has been their respect for the right of Pakistan, as also other countries, to determine what is in their own interest, says the author .
 China's support of Pakistan in the 1965 crisis made a deep impression on the Pakistani people . China’s support for Pakistan in 1965 crisis was made a strong impression on Pakistan .
 President Liu Shao-chi’s visit to Pakistan in March 1966 was a memorable occasion . Liu visited Pakistan in 1966 and visited the country's capital .
 In Lahore, Karachi and Dhaka, the welcome by enthusiastic multitudes was on a scale rarely seen since Independence . Pakistanis welcomed by multitudes in Lahore and Karachi, Dhaka .
 His description of Sino-Pakistac relations as mujahidana dosti aptly translated the sentiments of the Pakistani people and boosted their morale . He described the relations between China and Pakistan as 'sino-Pakistanistac'
 Thii friendship, forged in the heat of the war, developed in succeeding years . "Thii friendship" developed in the aftermath of the conflict .
 It also gave $60 million for development assistance in 1965, a further $40 million in 1969 and $200 million for the next five-year plan . In 1965, the government also gave a total of $60million in development assistance .
 For China, itself a low-income developing country, this assistance was generous . For China itself, it was generous. For China it was a generous.
 Also, China placed emphasis on the transfer of technology to help Pakistan achieve self-reliance . Also, the Chinese government said it will work with Pakistan to develop self-sufficient technology .
 The Heavy Mechanical Complex, the Heavy Rebuild Factory, the Kamra Aeronautical Complex and several other industrial plants were later established with Chinese assistance . The heavy Mechanical Complex was established with the help of China .
 To provide a land link, the two countries decided, in 1969, to build a road across the Karakorum . The two countries agreed to build the road in 1969 .
 China played a major part in the construction of the Karakorum Highway linking Gilgit in the Northern Areas with Kashgar in Xinjiang . The highway is over the second highest mountain range in the world and through the 15,800-foot high Khunjerab Pass . The Kar
 President Yahya Khan described friendly cooperation with China as the cornerstone’ of Pakistan’s policy . Speaking at the UN General Assembly in October 1970, he said friendly cooperation was the cornerstone' of Pakistan's policy .
 Pakistan’s policy of normalisation of relations with the Soviet Union gathered momentum after the 1965 War . Pakistan has normalised relations with Russia since the 1960s .
 Pakistan sent a military delegation to Moscow in 1966 to probe the purchase of military supplies from the Soviet Union . Moscow did not reject the idea, and although no agreement was concluded, Moscow didn't reject the proposal .
 Ayub Khan visited Moscow in 1967, and before Kosygin returned the visit in April 1968 . Pakistan informed the United States of its decision not to renew the lease for Badaber electronic base upon its expiry in July 1968 .
 Kosygin announced Soviet assistance for building a steel plant in 1968 . In 1968, he announced Soviet aid for building the steel plant .
 Later that year the Soviet Union agreed to sell a small quantity of military equipment to Pakistan . The Soviet Union sold a small amount of equipment to the country .
 Kosygin visited Pakistan again in May 1969 for a meeting with Yahya Khan, the new military ruler . He met with Khan again in 1969 for the first time in Pakistan .
 Soviet Union committed over a billion dollars in soft loans for thirty-one development projects . The Soviet Union spent the majority of the Soviet Union's budget on development projects in the USSR .
 In the East Pakistan crisis, Soviet priority reverted to one-sided support for India, leading to a breakdown of the developing links between the two countries . In the 1980s, the Soviet priority was to support India, rather than Pakistan .
 The Pakistan-US alliance broke down after the outbreak of Pakistan-India hostilities in the Rann of Kutch and war over Kashmir five months later . The alliance was already under increasing strain since 1962, already under strain .
 The United States was antagonised by Pakistani allegations of betrayal . The U.S. is antagonising Pakistan by the Pakistani government . The Pakistani government has been accused of corruption .
 Lyndon Johnson told Ayub Khan in December that the alliance between the U.S. and Pakistan was over . The alliance was over, Johnson said in December .
 Any further economic aid was made conditional on Pakistan curtailing iti close ties with China . Pakistan made the pledge in a bid to keep economic aid flowing from China .
 Neither Washington nor Islamabad renounced the 1959 Cooperation Agreement, however . Washington and Islamabad signed the agreement in 1959 .
 The United States still valued the Badaber base, and Pakistan, not wanting to further antagonise the U.S. superpower, decided to wait till 1968 when the base agreement would expire . Pakistan did not want to antagonise United States superpower .
 The alliance was torn apart because of the divergent pulls of state interests in a changing world situation . The alliance has been torn apart due to the diverge pulls of states interests .
 In early 1960s the U.S. did not decide to downgrade Pakistan but the opportunity of pulling India into its own orbit was irresistible in the context of global strategic power and ideological confrontation . The opportunity to pull India back into its orbit in the 1960s was irresistible .
 The damage to friendly cooperation between Pakistan and the U.S. might have been contained if both sides lowered expectations of each other in the light of the evolution in the strategic environment .
 Kennedy was right, in his observation in 1962, that ‘allowance must be made for the special circumstances’ but his successor made no such allowance . Kennedy was correct, in . 1962, in an observation in his . observation, that 'allowances must be . made for
 Pakistani spokesmen unnecessarily emotionalised an objective situation, a tendency that culminated in accusing the U.S. of ‘betrayal’ in 1965 . The charge that could not stand scrutiny could not be scrutiny .
 The U.S. was committed under the 1959 agreement to come to Pakistan’s assistance in the event of aggression . The United States did not accept such an interpretation of the Indian attack across the border .
 An ally, especially an unequal one, cannot compel another to underwrite objectives not envisaged in the alliance agreement . The United States did not endorse, much less support, the Anglo-French-lsraeli attack on Egypt in 1956 .
 The alliance with Pakistan was conceived by the U.S. in the context of the threat of communist aggression . The alliance was conceived as a response to the threat to communist aggression.
 The Manila Pact did not identify any source of aggression, and even if aggression was recognised to have occurred, it entailed only the obligation to consult together to agree on measures for common defence . Even if aggression occurred, the pact only entailed agreeing on common defence measures .
 The U.S. was limited by the treaty to a reservation in the event of communist aggression . Even that obligation was limited to the United States through a reservation made in the treaty .
 CENTO provides generally for cooperation for security and defence without creating any specific obligations in the event of aggression . CENTO provided generally for . cooperation for . security and . defence without . creating any . specific obligations .
 Pakistani failure to consult the United States in advance of its high-risk policy in Kashmir widened the gulf between the two countries that had opened up as a result of their divergent policies towards China and the increasing United States assistance to India after its border clash with China .
 Ayub Khan realised the necessity of mending fences with the U.S. Still he realised the need to mended fences with America .
 Some people in high places recognised Pakistan’s potential for contributing to better understanding between the United States and China . Also, tempers cooled down in Washington as some people in . high places .
 Secretary of State Dean Rusk asked Foreign Minister Bhutto for Pakistan’s help to arrange a meeting with the Chinese foreign minister for discussions on Vietnam . Secretary Rusk even asked for Pakistan's help arranging the meeting .
 Bhutto, increasingly on the defensive for his role in policies leading to alienation of the U.S., was asked to resign . Bhuttto was increasingly on . the defensive . for his . role leading to . alienation of . the United States .
 On 12 April 1967, the United States announced termination of military assistance to Pakistan (and India) The U.S. exempted only cash sales of spare parts for the previously supplied equipment on a case-by-case basis .
 US-Pakistan relations improved after President Richard Nixon took office in 1969 . U.S. and Pakistan improved after Nixon took over in 1969.
 The United States relaxed the ban on military supplies, allowing the sale of a limited number of B-57 and F-104 aircraft . The U.S. relaxed the restrictions on military supply .
 Nixon and Kissinger appraised China to be confronted with the ‘nightmare of hostile encirclement’ in which it might welcome ‘strategic reassurance’ from improved relations with the U.S.
 Tentative probes were initiated in the 15-year old ambassador level contacts in Warsaw . Tentative probe was initiated in a fifteen-year-old ambassadorlevel contacts in Poland .
 In January 1970, the U.S. offered to send a representative to Beijing to consider ideas to reduce tension . The United States offered the visit to China in January 1970 .
 Nixon started to dismantle obstacles to better relations by relaxing restrictions on travel and trade . To signal serious intent, Nixon began to relax restrictions by relaxing travel, trade restrictions .
 Kissinger used personal friends for confidential contacts with the Chinese embassy in Paris in order to prepare the ground for a positive outcome of the proposed direct dialogue . Kissinger is well known for his preference for secret diplomacy .
 Yahya Khan conveyed the Chinese response in an elaborately confidential manner . Khan returned to the country to find out what the Chinese had done .
 Kissinger was fascinated by Ambassador Agha Hilaly’s insistence on dictating the message at slow speed, which he had to take in long hand . Ambassador Hilaly had to dictate the message in long-hand .
 For four months thereafter, messages were passed on this Kissinger-HilaJyYahya Khan channel to Beijing in utter secrecy . The messages were sent to Beijing from Kissinger's office .
 Pakistan was equally helpful in arranging Kissinger’s secret trip for talks in Beijing, 9-11 July 1971 . Pakistan also helped arrange Kissinger's secret trip to China for talks . Pakistan was also a key part of Kissinger's visit to China in 1971 .
 The Muslim peoples were stirred, as never before, because of the Israeli occupation of Jerusalem, the first qibla of Islam . The Muslim people were stirred by the occupation, says Mohammed Ali Ayoyo .
 Ardent solidarity with the victims of aggression was made manifest not only in words but also in concrete ways . "Argentine solidarity" was made visible in the streets of Paris, Paris, and Paris .
 Pakistani deputations in these countries volunteered their services and participated in action . Pakistani military deputations participated in the action . Pakistan's military deputation in the countries volunteered to participate in action.
 Pakistan’s ambassador to the United Nations, Agha Shahi, made an effective contribution to the Arab cause . Shahi is Pakistan's ambassador to U.N. Pakistan has made a significant contribution to Arab cause.
 In reasoned speeches he supported resolutions in the General Assembly calling for respect for international law and for the rights of the people of the occupied territories .
 The resolution declaring invalid the measures imposed by Israel to change the status of Jerusalem was piloted by him . He also piloted the resolution declaring Israel's actions invalid .
 On 21 August 1969, arson inflicted extensive damage on A1 Aqsa Mosque, which is associated with the Prophets Ascension . The mosque was destroyed by arson in 1969 .
 It triggered a tidal wave of anguish and outrage among Muslims throughout the world . The attack on Muslims in Iraq triggered a wave of outrage .
 It adopted a moving declaration reflecting the profound distress of Muslim peoples . It agreed to coordinate action to secure Israeli withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied in 1967 . It affirmed full support to Palestinian people in their struggle for national liberation .
 Organisation of the Islamic Conference with permanent secretariat to be located in Jeddah pending the liberation of Jerusalem . Also recognising that a common creed constituted a powerful bond between Muslim peoples, the leaders decided to institutionalise the conference .
 Criteria for membership of the OIC were defined against the background of India’s ‘pathetic importuning’ 10 for an invitation to attend the Islamic summit . India was invited to the summit on the grounds of its large Muslim population . Criteria was defined against background
 Pakistan has agreed to accord representation to the Muslims of India at the conference . Pakistan is an heir to the legacy of the Muslim community in South Asia .
 If the size of a state’s Muslim population was the criterion for membership, many other states such as the USSR and China should have been invited to participate . Many other states like China and USSR should have had their Muslim minorities larger than the population of some of the participating Muslim states
 The Karakorum Highway, crossing the Khunjerab pass, at 15,800 ft. was opened to adventure-travelling in 1986 . It is the highest mountain pass in the world, crossing 15,000ft .
 Leaders of Bengal played a seminal role in the formation of the Muslim League and the formulation of the demand for Pakistan . Shared interest in the protection of cultural, economic and political rights brought the Muslim people of British India together .
 After the state came into existence, the unity of its two wings, separated by a thousand miles, came under strain as a result of several factors, some of which were inherent in demography and differential colonial legacy and resource endowment . Others arose from narrow and shortsighted politics, such
 Differences with the distant centres views began to surface in East Pakistan soon after Independence . East Pakistan is one of the most populous parts of Pakistan .
 Students protested when Quaid-i-Azam said Urdu alone would be the national language . A group of students protested when he made the announcement in 1948 .
 East Pakistan did not have a sense of participation in the government in distant Karachi . East Pakistan had a strong sense of involvement in government in Karachi . Karachi was a major city of influence in politics .
 After elections in East Pakistan in 1954, the Muslim League was eclipsed . The Muslim League lost control of East Pakistan after elections .
 In 1946 the most representative body of elected Muslim League legislators 3 had adopted a unanimous resolution declaring that Pakistan would be 'a sovereign independent State' thus clarifying the ambiguity of the 1940 resolution .
 Delays in constitution-making and holding of national elections exacerbated East Pakistan’s sense of exclusion . East Pakistan has a history of feeling excluded from the region .
 East Pakistan’s isolation during the 1965 War and its lack of selfdefence capability gave a fillip to the existing demand for autonomy . East Pakistan was isolated in 1965 and had no self-defence capabilities .
 In March 1966, the Awami League leader Sheikh Mujibur Rahman put forward Six Points 4 calling for a new constitution . Federal government would be responsible ‘only for defence and foreign affairs’ for which purpose it would be ‘provided with requisite revenue resources’ by the
 Ayub Khan’s highly centralised government equated the demand for autonomy with secessionism . The centralised state of Kashmir has long been a source of tension in the region .
 A process of polarisation set in with West Pakistani opinion looking at East Pakistanis as dupes of Indian propaganda . Bengali elites ascribed motives of domination and exploitation to West Pakistanis .
 Operatives of its secret service agency, Research and Analysis Wing —intensified subversion . Operators of its Secret Service Agency, R&A Wing, will continue to subvert .
 In 1966 they met with a group of extremists in Agartala to plan sabotage . In 1966, the group met with an extremist group to plan to sabotage the government .
 A raid on an armoury led to the arrest of twenty-eight people including a few low-level civilian and armed forces personnel in January 1969 . The raid was carried out in the wake of the Second World War .
 The case against them was not without substance but the government also implicated Mujibur Rahman, though he was in custody during the Agartala Conspiracy period . Mujibur Rahman was also implicated in the case .
 Opinion in East Pakistan concluded that the case was concocted for political persecution . Opinion in the East Pakistan conclude that the trial is political persecution. Opinion in Pakistan concluded .
 A cyclone of ferocious intensity in November 1970 left death and devastation in its trail . The cyclone was the deadliest cyclone ever recorded in a cyclone .
 The federal government has been charged with indifference to the plight of the people of East Pakistan . The government was accused of indifference .
 Bhutto emerged with the second largest number of seats, all from West Pakistan, and sought a share in power . He sought to gain a share of power with the West .
 Sheikh Mujibur Rahman had earlier told Yahya Khan the Six Point demand was negotiable . After the electoral triumph he became a prisoner of his own extremist rhetoric .
 When the President went to Dhaka he found Mujibur Rahman was in no mood for a compromise . Mujibur Rahman was not in the mood for compromise, he says .
 Yahya Khan then convened the Assembly for 3 March, hoping the political leaders would settle the issues among themselves . Khan then convenes the Assembly to settle the issue among themselves.
 Bhutto announced that his party would boycott the Assembly unless the constitutional issues and power sharing were first resolved . Bhuttto announced he would be boycotting the assembly unless constitutional issues were resolved . He said his party will boycott the assembly until constitutional issues are resolved .
 Yahya Khan then postponed the Assembly meeting and again went to Dhaka in mid-March . Khan then postpones the meeting again in March .
 Whether his purpose was to hold talks with Mujibur Rahman or prepare for imposition of martial law remained unclear . Whether he was preparing for imposing martial law remains unclear .
 Talks broke down on 23 March when the Awami League proposed Pakistan should be made a confederation . The talks broke down in March after talks between Pakistan and Pakistan broke down .
 India was determined to obstruct and prevent the effort through instigation, abetment and military intervention . Not only was use of military force against compatriots unconscionable, it was foolish to hope 42,320* West Pakistani troops could suppress 75 million people .
 India had started planning to exploit the internal situation in Pakistan years earlier . India had planned to exploit Pakistan's internal situation years earlier, say officials .
 On 30 January 1971, an Indian Airlines plane named Ganga, on a Srinagar-Delhi flight, was hijacked to Lahore by two Kashmiri youths . Ganga was on a flight from Kashmiri to Delhi from Delhi .
 New Delhi demands compensation and immediate surrender of the criminals . New Delhi made furious protests, demanding compensation and surrender .
 Islamabad was paralysed, too proud to concede to peremptory Indian demands . Islamabad was too weak to control the emotional outburst of popular opinion . Islamabad is paralysed by this bolt from the blue, Islamabad says .
 After Yahya Khan ordered the crackdown in East Pakistan, the Indian government moved into higher gear . The Indian government has been cracking down on East Pakistan .
 India saw in the crisis an ‘opportunity of the century’ to cut Pakistan into two, says India . India saw the crisis as an opportunity to cut the country into two . Pakistan is the largest country in the world .
 The Indian border police started operating inside East Pakistan . Within days, the border police began operating inside the region .
 India embarked on an emergency training programme for Bengali army officers . India also provided military equipment for armed resistance fighters .
 First secretly, and later openly, India began building up a rebel force called the Mukti Bahini . India began secretly, then openly, building up an army of rebels in the 1950s .
 Public opinion and the media in the U.S. and Western Europe were outraged by the Pakistani military crackdown . Public opinion in the United States and Western European was outraged .
 The excesses committed by Pakistani forces were reported at great length, and the number of refugees who entered India was wildly exaggerated . Pakistan's excesses were reported in great length and the refugee numbers were exaggerated .
 Few took notice of Indian interference or its rejection of proposals for impartial international inspection . Few bothered to take notice of the Indian interference in the process .
 The U.S. provided $350 million in aid to ease India’s burden on account of the refugees . Indira Gandhi did not dissuade her preconceived purpose .
 He acquiesced in the State Department’s decision to embargo delivery of arms to Pakistan . The State Department made the decision to stop arms sales to Pakistan.
 New Delhi also started negotiations with Moscow with the aim of securing Soviet military and diplomatic assistance in order to reduce the chances of Chinese intervention on Pakistan’s side .
 Moscow was not then hostile and had even reciprocated Pakistan’s efforts for improvement of bilateral relations . Moscow had reciprocated Pakistani efforts to improve bilateral relations.
 The withering of the Pakistan-US alliance and the termination of Badaber base agreement with the United States had removed major obstacles to normalization of Pakistan-U.S. relations .
 Islamabad did not see any reason for Moscow to assist India in its design against Pakistan . Islamabad does not want Russia to assist Pakistan in the design of its design .
 deterioration of Sino-Soviet relations had introduced radical changes in the global strategic environment . However, deterioration of China-Russia relations and incipient trends in China-U.S. relations had brought radical changes .
 Islamabad didn't realize the impact of its role as a channel between Washington and Beijing . Islamabad did not realize the . impact of the . role of its . role .
 Pakistan concluded a Treaty of Peace, Friendship and Cooperation with India on 9 August 1971 . Taking advantage of the spiralling crisis between Pakistan and India, it concluded a treaty of peace, friendship and cooperation .
 Its article IX committed the two countries to mutual consultation in the event of an attack or threat of attack . The two countries will take ‘appropriate effective measures’ to ensure peace and security .
 "Not as specific as an alliance, its purpose was unmistakably strategic," says President Obama . "The purpose of this alliance was to be strategic," he says .
 The Soviet Union, in effect, provided India with an umbrella against intervention by China, allowing it to execute its design with impunity .
 The importance of the Indo-Soviet Treaty was not correctly assessed . Some thought the Soviet objective was only to restrain India . The importance was not properly assessed, some thought it was only for India .
 Indira Gandhi rejected Washington’s suggestion for UN monitoring of the border in order to curb guerrilla activities from its territory . Washington suggested that the UN should monitor the border .
 By October, Yahya Khan informed Washington that he was willing to grant full autonomy to East Pakistan . The East Pakistanis were granted full autonomy in October .
 A month later he was even agreeable to a unilateral withdrawal of forces . A month after that, he was agreeable to the unilateral withdrawal .
 Any such a decision would have been better than the fate that befell the country . Any such decision would've been better .
 Indira Gandhi undertook an international tour of India . Indira was the prime minister of the country .
 She visited Washington on 4-5 November, mainly for the purpose of influencing public opinion .
 During the two years of his administration, the U.S. had given $1.1 billion in aid to India . During that time, the United States had given more than $1 billion to the country .
 He detested the condescension Indira Gandhi exuded, like her sermonizing father, 20 . He was opposed to her designs against Pakistan . But he detested her condescension .
 Nixon sent another letter to Indira Gandhi informing her of Yahya Khan’s offer of unilateral withdrawal, and he also wrote to Kosygin to intercede with her .
 Yahya Khan invoked the 1959 agreement asking for U.S. assistance . The agreement was signed by the United States on 2 December .
 The situation in East Pakistan grew desperate by the day . Meanwhile, the military situation in the region grew desperate .
 Yahya Khan's decision proved ineffectual and merely helped India advance its military plan which was to commence operations on 4 December . This decision, like the others, proved to be ineffectional .
 Despite Indian propaganda, the U.N. took a principled position . The United Nations took a stand against the Indian government .
 On 4 December the Security Council voted 11 to 4 in support of a resolution calling for a ceasefire and withdrawal of forces, but it was killed by the USSR veto of the resolution .
 On 7 December the General Assembly recommended a ceasefire and withdrawal of forces to their own territories and the creation of conditions for the voluntary return of refugees . The General Assembly also recommended a withdrawal of troops from their territories .
 The overwhelming vote of the world community had no effect on India, however, as it persisted on its ruthless course of aggression in violation of the principles of the Charter . India has been accused of a series of human rights violations in Kashmir .
 China recognised that India was guilty of gross interference’ in Pakistan’s internal affairs . China was supportive of Pakistan, and recognised India's 'gross interference' in Pakistan's internal affairs.
 China continued to supply military equipment under existing agreements and extended political support to the Pakistani position in the U.N. China also extended political backing to Pakistan in the United Nations .
 Kissinger called in the Indian ambassador tQ to warn against such a course of action . Kissinger called the ambassador on 9 December to warn of the dangers of such a move .
 On 10 December, Nixon sent a message to Leonid Brezhnev saying if Indian military operations continued, ‘we must inevitably look toward a confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States.’ Nixon sent the message .
 Washington decided it could not allow Moscow to intimidate Beijing if it wanted its China policy to retain credibility . The U.S. decided not to let Moscow intimidate Beijing .
 On 9 December Nixon authorised the dispatch of a task force of eight ships, including the aircraft carrier Enterprise, from the Pacific to the Bay of Bengal . The task force was dispatched by the President of the Philippines .
 Poland proposed a resolution in the Security Council which called for the transfer of power to the elected representatives in East Pakistan, and a ceasefire and troop withdrawals by both sides . At this stage, Poland proposes a resolution calling for the immediate transfer of the .
 Presumably it had Soviet support and could have saved Pakistan from further humiliation . Presumably it could have, even at this eleventh hour, saved Pakistan .
 As often happens in a crisis, the rush of events overtakes human capacity to make timely decisions . But, as often happens, it's not always the case that the rush to make a decision is not enough .
 Indira Gandhi offered an unconditional ceasefire on 16 December . Under mounting U.S. and Soviet pressure, the ceasefire was offered . The ceasefire was agreed under mounting pressure .
 Speaking in parliament, she is reported to have said she defeated Pakistan . She said she avenged centuries of Hindu humiliation at the hands of Muslim sultans and emperors .
 It is a sad commentary on the American system that it precluded the U.S. from fulfilling its treaty obligations towards an ally . The United States should have been able to reach a treaty agreement with Russia, Russia's president says .
 President Nixon and he had 'clearly seen the Indian game from the beginning’ but ‘failing to grasp the strategic dynamics, the American Congress and media, not to mention South Asia ‘experts’ in the State Department, opposed Nixon’s policy .
 East Pakistan has been neglected by Pakistani leaders over the years . The region has been excluded from due share in power . East Pakistan is one of Pakistan's most neglected regions .
 The people are bewildered and distraught, their pride in the armed forces destroyed, their leadership exposed as self-centred and incompetent . The people were bewildered, distraught, the people were .
 Over 93,000 soldiers and civilians were taken prisoner after the Pakistani contingent in East Pakistan was overwhelmed . The Pakistani contingent was overwhelmed after it was overwhelmed by the invasion .
 Indian forces seized 5,139 square miles of territory in West Pakistan . A million people were dislocated by the Indian forces . Indian forces took over West Pakistan and displaced a million people .
 Bhutto launched efforts to ‘pick up the pieces’, bring the nation to grips with the new reality, rebuild morale and confidence, and rehabilitate Pakistan in the world community . Pakistanis are trying to rebuild morale, re-orient failed policies both at home and abroad
 To rescue Pakistan in this predicament he decided first to turn to friends for sympathy, support . Pakistan is in a state of crisis in the world and has been hit by a tsunami .
 In the 1960s he had advocated ‘normalisation’ of the ‘abnormal’ relations with the United States, 44 . He was responsible for the myth of American betrayal in 1965 .
 China extended diplomatic support and economic and military assistance . As always, China extended support for the U.S.
 Bhutto also undertook a whirlwind tour of Islamic countries in the Middle East and Africa . He upheld the principles of law for the unconditional release of Pakistani prisoners and the withdrawal of Indian forces from occupied territories .
 Bangladesh was recognised precipitately by Western Europe, Australia and New Zealand . It persuaded several countries to do so simultaneously . Australia, New Zealand and Australia also recognised it as Bangladesh .
 When Bhutto visited Moscow in March 1972, the Soviet leaders suggested recognition of Bangladesh and negotiations with India for a ‘realistic’ solution of the post-war problems .
 Like the United States, it seemed exhausted by its diplomatic efforts to avoid a confrontation between them during the December war . Like the U.S., it seemed to be exhausted by their diplomatic efforts .
 Pakistan was left to itself to solve the problems of prisoners of war and recovery of territory occupied by India . Pakistan left to solve problems of prisoner of war .
 For the texts of the resolutions, see Syed Sharifuddin Pirzada, The Pakistan Resolution, Pakistan Publications, Karachi .
 This figure does not include local raisings and paramilitary formations . This figure did not include paramilitary formations and local raises .
 Yahya Khan played the key intermediary role between Washington and Beijing in arranging Kissinger's secret departure from Pakistan for China . Khan played a key role in arranging the secret departure of Kissinger .
 V Longer, The Defence and Foreign Policy of India, was published by V. Longer in 1988, 1988 .
 Pakistani officials informed U.S. official Maurice Williams was so informed by Pakistani officials in August . The visiting United States official was told by Pakistan officials . Pakistani officials were so informed they informed the visiting U.K. official .
 For over four months after the ceasefire of 17 December no foreign power offered to mediate a peace settlement . Pakistan or India did not take the initiative to call for a bilateral meeting .
 Dhar to Islamabad for preliminary talks preparatory to a peace conference . Dhar is due to arrive in Islamabad for talks with Islamabad for peace talks .
 Pakistan had a glimpse of the demands India had in mind at the meeting . The meeting was held in Islamabad, Pakistan's capital .
 India was not prepared to release the prisoners of war and withdraw from occupied territory without conditions . India did not want to release prisoners and withdraw without conditions, it said .
 Pakistan, on its part, wanted the peace conference to address issues generated by the war . Pakistan wanted the conference to focus on the issues raised by the conflict . The conference will be held in Pakistan's capital Islamabad .
 Murree meeting did not resolve the question as to whether immediate postwar issues or the establishment of durable peace (i.e. settlement of the Kashmir question) should receive priority at summit conference .
 Dhar and Secretary General Aziz Ahmed agreed to place both items on the agenda for simultaneous consideration . Both items will be placed in the same session of the General Assembly .
 The Shimla conference, even more than the Murree meeting, seems in retrospect a veritable drama in which superb diplomats played skilful roles . Words and gestures masked, but did not conceal, the real aims and intentions of each side .
 Bhutto and Indira Gandhi, the twin-directors of the drama without a script, were also the principal actors in the drama . The drama was not a script .
 Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was a leader of exceptional intellect and percipience . He also excelled in rhetoric and eloquence . Bhuttto was the prime minister of Pakistan's first government .
 A proud man, he had the misfortune to come to the helm when Pakistan lay prostrate in defeat . Pakistan had to be defeated by Pakistan in the World Cup in 2010 .
 He must have hated having to negotiate from a weak bargaining position, but comprehended the country’s predicament . The traumatised nations need to be spared further humiliation, he said .
 Pakistan's legal education and superb knowledge of the English language stood Pakistan in good stead at the Shimla conference .
 He proposed the ‘no-prejudice’ clause in the Shimla Agreement, which Indira Gandhi accepted, protecting Pakistan’s position on the Kashmir question from compromise .
 His party colleague and able lawyer, Rafi Raza, later disclosed that he had suggested the idea . Raza's party colleague said he suggested the proposal .
 Indira Gandhi, petite and seemingly frail in body but robust in mind, was deceptive also in her inarticulate speech . Her petite body was deceptive, also deceptive, in her speech . Indira was a formidable force in the world, but was also a force in
 The words at her command did not do justice to the clarity and depth of her thought . No one could miss the thrust of her remarks, she said .
 She seemed engagingly shy but was entirely self-confident and unwavering in resolve . She seemed entirely shy but she was entirely confident and unafraid .
 A rare leader with a capacity to view her role in history from a vantage point in the future, she spoke and acted with a sense of accountability to her country, she says . She spoke with a . sense of . accountability to . her country .
 The ‘iron lady’ was also intensely nationalistic and probably never felt happier and more self-fulfilled than on the day when India humiliated Pakistan .
 She was capable of discerning the limits beyond which the adversary could not be pushed or squeezed, as she demonstrated . She demonstrated by reducing the demands in the final draft in order to prevent collapse of the peace conference .
 Aziz Ahmed was Pakistan’s secretary general for foreign affairs . He was a senior and reputable civil servant, with experience at top levels of diplomacy . Ahmed served as ambassador to Washington and foreign secretary .
 He was widely respected as much for his ability and integrity as for his patriotism . He is widely respected for his integrity as well as his ability .
 Stern of mien and single-minded in pursuit of national interest, he probably did not win the sympathy of his Indian interlocutors . But even they could not grudge him credit as a dour negotiator and hard bargainer .
 Although capable of holding his own in argument, he seldom sought to score points . He was a quiet man who rarely sought to make an argument, but he was a strong leader .
 He diverted attention to the common ground between the two sides and brought discussion back onto a constructive course . When debate became sterile and unpleasant, it threatened to derail negotiations .
 Without a peer in knowledge and erudition, he was also blessed with lucidity of expression to match the clarity of his thought, he said .
 Comedian joked that he meant no offence at the end of his speech . But the chuckle at his own wisecrack instantly reassured every one that it was not an offence .
 Kaul's unctuous speech contrasted vividly with unmistakable hostility towards Pakistan . Kaul, the Indian foreign secretary, spoke in a speech at the Indian parliament .
 Rafi Raza was an able barrister and special assistant to president Bhutto . He was a senior member of the Pakistan delegation both at the Murree and Shimla meetings .
 He seldom intervened in discussions across the table, but used the weight of his position as a confidant of Bhutto to good effect in informal negotiations with senior Indian officials .
 The wide gulf between the Pakistani and Indian positions was manifest in the opening round of negotiations at Shimla on 28 |uneune .
 Initial drafts tabled by India on 29 June and by Pakistan on 30 June . It was reflected more vividly in the initial drafts of the draft .
 The draft drafts were bare of the overlay of protestations of goodwill and noble intentions . Concise and cold in their content, the drafts were cold in the content .
 Pakistani and Indian drafts diverged fundamentally in concepts about the outcome of the Shimla conference . Leaving aside the preambular parts, pledging mutual respect for independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, the draft drafts diverge fundamentally .
 The draft was comprehensive in every aspect of interest to India but did not include a word about withdrawals from occupied territories or release of prisoners . Pakistan's draft did not mention withdrawal of prisoners or withdrawal of occupied territories .
 The two drafts presented an interesting contrast in their selection of principles for the conduct and regulation of relations between the two countries .
 Pakistan emphasised the universally recognised principles of relations between sovereign states . The Indian selection betrayed intent to construct a rather peculiar and particularistic framework of principles, with not even mentioning the UN Charter .
 Most substantive difference between the two drafts centred on Jammu and Kashmir . Of course, the most substantive difference is that the draft is that of Kashmir .
 India proposed discussion on Kashmir question and inclusion of the envisaged agreement in the suggested treaty . Pakistan omitted any reference to it because of the purpose of the Shimla conference was limited to resolving the problems resulting from the December war .
 In negotiations that followed, both sides tried to give the impression of accommodation, each toning down its own formulations . But there was little progress on core issues .
 By 1 July a sense of gloom set in, which was reflected in the second Indian draft . The draft was due to be held in New Delhi on 1 July .
 Premised on the failure to bridge differences on substantive issues, it envisaged an interim agreement, leaving the substantive issues for settlement at a subsequent summit . The interim agreement was envisaged leaving substantive issues at a later summit .
 Pakistan declines to join such a charade that would create an illusion of success . Pakistan declined to join the charade, which would create illusion of successful .
 Faced with the collapse of the Shimla conference, India changed tack again . India has changed tack since Shimla collapsed in 2009 .
 A detailed account of the discussions on various issues is necessary for clarification of the obstacles, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "A detailed account is necessary to clarify the obstacles"
 Its draft emphasised the UN Charter and universally recognised principles of relations between sovereign states . India had failed to implement the obligations arising from the Security Council resolutions on Kashmir, it says .
 Indian luminaries were unconvincing in their attempt to justify the exclusion of a mention of the UN Charter . The UN Charter incorporates accepted principles of international law, representing the accumulated experience and distilled wisdom of the community of states .
 The Indian side gave up their stand, and reference to the Charter was incorporated in the agreement . Realising the hiatus in their logic, the Indian side decided to give up their stance .
 Pakistan argued long and hard in favour of retaining the Charter formulation and would have insisted on it were the circumstances normal . The Indian side suggested that the two countries agree to ‘undertake to settle all issues between them bilaterally and exclusively by peaceful means' Pakistan argued . India suggested that
 Arguments on principles of relations and means of settlement of differences, even presented in the abstract, barely concealed their real object . Arguments for differences barely concealed the real object of the argument, says historian .
 Pakistan, on the other hand, struggled because, and in spite of, the constraints of the situation, to safeguard its rights under law as an independent member of the world community . Pakistan struggled because of the constraints, and despite the constraints the country was able to protect its rights .
 This contest of wills was more vividly illustrated in the discussions on the release of prisoners of war and, especially, on Jammu and Kashmir . It was more vividly illustrated by the discussion on the prisoner of war .
 India made the release and repatriation of Pakistani military and civilians prisoners contingent on the concurrence of Bangladesh . The release was made as a condition for the release of Pakistan military and civilian prisoners .
 India was honour-bound, said Indian interlocutors, to consult and associate with the Bangladesh government over the decision regarding their release . India was honoured-bound to consult with Bangladesh over the release of the prisoners .
 Bangladesh would use the prisoners as a lever to pressure Pakistan into agreeing to its demands, it is reported .
 Dhaka claimed a share of Pakistan’s assets (gold and foreign exchange reserves, aircraft of the national airline, etc. etc.) without reference to its debt and other liabilities . Dhaka claims a share . of Pakistan's assets without reference . to its debts and liabilities .
 Urdu-speaking residents of former East Pakistan had declined to accept its citizenship . Also wanted Pakistan to accept the transfer of all those Urdu speaking residents of ex-East Pakistan who had refused to accept citizenship .
 Both Dhar and Haksar told the Pakistan side that India wanted Bangladesh to relent and that it had, in fact, used ’whatever little influence’ it had with the government of Bangladesh in favour of forbearance . Sheikh Mujibur Rahman was an ’emotional
 The Pakistani side could see that India itself was not averse to using prisoners as a bargaining counter . They might have believed in what they said, but the Pakistani side might see that . India itself is not always willing to use prisoners as bargaining counter.
 Dhar’s statement that India did not want to use the Pakistani prisoners for any objective of its own was implicitly contradicted by the Indian minister for external affairs three days later . Dhar said India did want to avoid using Pakistani prisoners to achieve its own objective .
 India seemed to believe that the Pakistani prisoners were a valuable bargaining chip in negotiations . Some of the prisoners were related to high officials of the armed forces . India seems to think that the prisoners are valuable bargaining chips .
 Bangladesh, too, proceeded on the same assumption, either on its own or on Indian instigation . Bangladesh is not the only country in the world to blame India for Bangladesh's failure .
 India's pledge, that the prisoners would not be released without the concurrence of Bangladesh, further encouraged Dhaka to adopt a hard stand . The prisoners will be held in Bangladesh without the consent of India .
 New Delhi has failed to see that Dhaka's attempt to use the release of prisoners would add to the bitterness already existing between Dhaka and Islamabad . Nor could New Delhi have failed to . see that it would add . to the bitter relations between the two cities .
 Some in the Pakistan delegation believed that New Delhi’s policy was based on such a calculation . Some in Pakistan delegation believe New Delhi's policy was actually based on that calculation . The Pakistan delegation was in New Delhi to discuss the issue .
 The Indian side did not, of course, know that, anticipating the exploitation of prisoners to extract concessions, Pakistani policy planners had decided in advance not to fall into the trap of bargaining over their release . Pakistan's policy planners have decided not to negotiate over the release .
 Pakistan realised that a willingness to do so would expose Pakistan to blackmail, as no price could then be too high for the ransom of the unfortunate soldiers and civilians . No price was then too high, as the ransom was then a high .
 Pakistan side took the position that the release of prisoners of war was an obligation that the custodian state had to discharge in accordance with the principles of international humanitarian law . The Pakistan side said the release was a duty of the country to release prisoners .
 Pakistan did not respond to initiatives from the Indian side to link prisoners to any other issue between either Pakistan and India, or Pakistan and Bangladesh . The Indian side did not link the prisoners with any other issues between Pakistan, India or Bangladesh .
 The first Pakistani draft at the Shimla conference called for compliance with this resolution . Pakistan has not yet agreed to a resolution to resolve the issue .
 India, however, did not even refer to this matter either in its first draft of 29 June or in its second draft of 1 July . India did not refer to the matter in either in the first draft or the second draft .
 Even its final draft referred to and provided for withdrawal of forces to the international border, but not to the 1949 ceasefire line in Jammu and Kashmir . The final draft of the agreement referred to withdrawal from international border .
 The Indian formulation about observance of respect for the 17 December 1971 ceasefire line was designed to compromise Pakistan’s position on Jammu and Kashmir . It was meant to compromise the Pakistani position on Kashmir .
 India would not let Pakistan off the hook, but it soon became obvious, however, that it would not . India would soon be looking to take Pakistan out of the spotlight .
 It was determined to try to utilise the leverage it then enjoyed in the negotiations in order to secure Pakistan’s acquiescence in a settlement of India’�s preference—legalisation of the status quo in Kashmir .
 This suggestion emerged not only from the statements of Indian interlocutors in the negotiations but also from their drafts . The suggestion emerged from statements and drafts of the Indian government's proposals .
 The Indian side initially avoided direct reference to the Kashmir question . During the verbal fencing in the negotiations, the Indian side avoided direct references to Kashmir .
 Even the first Indian draft mentioned the subject only in a note at the bottom of the last page . The first draft of the Indian constitution mentions the subject in only a note .
 Dhar and Haksar were too courteous to raise the issue directly, much less in an abrasive manner . Perhaps Dhar was too polite to raise it directly .
 Aziz Ahmed was leader of Pakistan’s official delegation and a minister of state . He ignored not only the question but also Kaul, a mere secretary, and continued to talk to Haksar, his counterpart .
 Kaul, his face flushed in anger, shut his notebook, its clap echoing in the hushed room . Kaul stood up from his seat to leave as if Aziz Ahmed’s reply made further negotiations futile . Ahmed's reply made Kaul leave the room .
 He forgot that not being the leader of the Indian delegation, he could not terminate the conference . Surprisingly for a diplomat of his long experience, he forgot that, not being a leader of India .
 Haksar had to virtually pull Kaul down by his coat tail to continue the meeting . Kaul had to be pulled down by Kaul's coat tail in order to continue .
 Indian draft envisaged separate discussions on Jammu and Kashmir, but an agreement on the question to be included as an integral part of the treaty to be signed at Shimla .
 The Indian draft implicitly treated Jammu and Kashmir as part of Indian territory . The Pakistani draft, premised on the disputed status of the state, referred to the state only in context of withdrawal of forces to the 1949 ceasefire line .
 Haksar himself took up the subject of Kashmir in the context of India’s suggestion for bilateral settlement of differences between the two countries .
 The United Nations, he argued, had not led the two countries ‘anywhere in the past,’ of course omitting to add that this was so because India had turned down each and every proposal by UN mediators to facilitate the implementation of the Security Council resolutions of 1948
 Haksar went on to say India did not accept the concept of self-determination . India had not only accepted the UN resolutions of 13 August 1948 and 5 January 1949 for a plebiscite .
 The discussion on Kashmir exposed the contradiction in India’s stance, manifest from its dual posture . The discussion exposed the contradictions in India's stance, say experts .
 Kashmir is constitutionally ‘a part and parcel of India’ and on the other it formally proposed discussions with Pakistan for an agreement on the Kashmir question . On the one hand it asserted that the state was constitutionally 'a part of India'
 Haksar declared that there could be no durable peace between India and Pakistan until there was ‘some agreement on some principles’ on which the question of Kashmir could be settled . Not only that, he also declared that the issue of Kashmir was a non-existent .
 India’s effort to secure an agreement on Kashmir was at a dead end, but it was not abandoned . India and Pakistan have been at odds for years over Kashmir issue .
 In essence, India suggested conversion of the new ceasefire line in Jammu and Kashmir into an international boundary, that is, partition of the state .
 Pakistan was resolved not to barter the Kashmiri right of selfdetermination . This idea was, however, a non-starter because Pakistan was not willing to accept it . Kashmiri's right of Kashmiri selfdetermination was also not a no-starter .
 India acted more or less as Kaul had done—it virtually terminated negotiations . Finding that a meeting ground between the two sides did not exist on the Kashmir question, India acted less than Kaul .
 The second Indian draft, tabled on 1 July, was limited in content to principles of relations and progressive normalisation measures . ‘The question of Jammu and Kashmir, repatriation of prisoners of war and civilian internees, withdrawal of all armed forces to their respective territories and
 Pakistani side was not prepared to sign such an agreement that settled none of the postwar issues . The Pakistani side did not want such a deal to settle any of the post-war issues .
 Indian side suddenly delink withdrawals to the international boundary from a settlement of Jammu and Kashmir . On 2 July the Indian side decided to delink withdrawal from the international border . The Indian side then delinked withdrawals from the settlement from Jammu & Kashmir .
 Final draft proposed withdrawal of forces to international border . Final draft given to Pakistan side in early afternoon proposes withdrawal of troops . Pakistan says it will withdraw troops from international border if necessary .
 Final draft was loaded with formulations designed to convert ‘Line of Peace’ in Jammu and Kashmir into an international boundary . The offer of withdrawals to the international border was attractive .
 Faced with a take-it-or-leave-it choice, Pakistan decided to leave it and so informed the Indian side at about 3m. Pakistan decided not to play at 3m .
 The expectant audience may have been disappointed but the officials were not surprised . The officials are not surprised at the result .
 India’s final draft of the proposed agreement had been rejected earlier by Pakistan . The gulf between the positions of the two countries after five days of intensive negotiations was very wide, with fundamental issues like Kashmir and even sovereignty at stake .
 Ashok S Chib, joint secretary in the Indian ministry of external affairs, prepared the final documents . Abdul Sattar, director general of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs, prepared them .
 The date had already turned but 2 July remained unchanged in the agreement . The agreement was signed past midnight between 2 and 3 July 1972 .
 The import of the deletions and amendments that Indira Gandhi conceded cannot be exaggerated by anyone aware of the issues arising from the conflicting aims and objectives of India and Pakistan at the Shimla conference . Pakistan and India had conflicting aims, objectives of both countries .
 India’s suggestion for the creation of a bilateral supervisory body, introduced for the first time in the final draft, was an attempt to salvage at least in part its aim to secure Pakistan's acquiescence in the status quo in Kashmir .
 It wanted to pave the ground for a call for the withdrawal of the U.N. Military Observers Group in India and Pakistan . It had been mandated by the Security Council to discharge specific functions in Jammu and Kashmir .
 By securing the deletion of the Indian proposal, Pakistan checkmated India’s move . Pakistan has secured the removal of the proposal .
 If India decided to refuse cooperation with UNMOGIP, it could not cite Shimla Agreement to justify its wilful violation of an international obligation . Even the addition of the clause ‘in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations’ in the paragraph on non-use of
 Bhutto did not want to be seen to have given up Pakistan’s historical position, which sought to link a no-war pledge to a self-executing mechanism for the resolution of disputes . Pakistan's historical position is that a no war pledge is linked to self-
 The Pakistan side could not know what explanations she gave to her cabinet colleagues and officials for reducing India’s demands below the rock-bottom level spelt out in the final draft of the agreement .
 Bhutto gave to his delegation it appeared that she was keen to salvage the Shimla conference from collapse . She decided to accept the changes without which, he told her, the people of Pakistan would reject the agreement .
 The presence at Shimla of several leaders of Pakistani political parties may have lent weight to this argument . The presence of several political parties in Shimla may have been an issue .
 Speculation as to why Indira Gandhi agreed to dilute the final draft misses the important point that even in the signed text of the Shimla Agreement India extracted a substantial price . Even in the agreed text, India extracted substantial price from India .
 Pakistan would not have agreed to some of the provisions were it not for the constraints and pressures under which it was obliged to negotiate in the aftermath of defeat . Pakistan would have not agreed to the provisions if it had not been forced to negotiate .
 India cut Pakistan into two, first by instigating and aiding separatism in East Pakistan and finally by military intervention . Exploiting the ‘opportunity of a century’, the country was cut into two by India’s actions .
 No progress whatsoever was made at Shimla on the question of recognition of Bangladesh . To take point first, no progress was made on the issue of recognition .
 Pakistan’s refusal to bargain over the release of prisoners weakened what both India and Bangladesh considered a lever of pressure . Pakistan refused to bargain with India over prisoners’ release . Both India, Bangladesh considered the move to release prisoners as leverage .
 The miscalculation was to cause considerable embarrassment to India as continued incarceration of these unfortunate soldiers and civilians in violation of international humanitarian law incurred worldwide criticism . India's detention of soldiers, civilians has been criticised worldwide .
 Bangladesh was disappointed at the time but, in the longer run, both it and Pakistan benefited . Pakistan won their first Test match at the age of 16 . Bangladesh won the toss in the first Test in 1996 .
 The delay in Pakistan’s extension of recognition until after Bangladesh consented to the release of all the prisoners helped avoid the added bitterness that would have resulted from the attempt to use the prisoners for bargaining . The delay saved the prospect of cooperative relations between the two countries . Pakistan's extension
 Subparagraph l of the Shimla Agreement, providing for peaceful settlement of differences, was projected as a triumph of Indian diplomacy . Sub paragraph l was projected by Indian diplomacy as an achievement .
 India unilaterally interpreted the provision to mean Pakistan could no longer seek ‘third party intervention,’ nor raise Pakistan-India issues in the U.N. or any other international forum . Pakistan can no longer raise issues with India in the United Nations, nor invoke any peaceful means other
 The text of the agreement did not compromise Pakistan’s rights under the UN Charter, Pakistan says . It maintained that the text did not . compromise Pakistan's rights under UN Charter . Pakistan says the text does not compromise the rights of the country .
 The attempt to interpret one provision in isolation from others is untenable in law, it is said . It is also untenable to interpret in isolation of others .
 Under the Charter, a state has the right to bring to the notice of the General Assembly or the Security Council any matter which threatens the maintenance of international peace and security . The Charter of Peace and Security is set to be amended by the UN .
 In practice, too, Pakistan has not allowed the Indian interpretation to affect its decisions from time to time to bring differences with India to the attention of the U.N. organs and agencies .
 Pakistan has continued to exercise its right to raise differences with India in international fora . Also, Pakistan has exercised right to exercise right to speak out against India . Pakistan has expressed right to voice differences with Indian in international forums .
 Pakistan has sought to underline the fact that the subparagraph does not prejudice Pakistan’s rights under international law . Pakistan has thus sought to . underline that the . paragraph does not . prejudice Pakistan's rights under . international law, Pakistan says . Pakistan says the paragraph does not
 Pakistan would not have accepted the Indian formulation, had the negotiating field been level, Pakistan says . That does not however gainsay the fact that, had been level-level, Pakistan would have rejected it .
 Pakistan’s own suggestion for a self-executing mechanism for the resolution of disputes has manifest advantages, says Pakistan . Pakistan's own suggestion is that self-Executing mechanism has advantages .
 It would provide an incentive to the parties to settle the differences through bilateral negotiation, which is the cheapest means of resolving differences . It would be an incentive for parties to use bilateral negotiation to settle differences .
 If they fail to settle between themselves, they could agree to invite intercession by a mutually acceptable third party . If that fails to settle, the pair could invite the intervention of a third party to do so .
 The dispute would be referred either by common consent to an arbitration tribunal or by either of the parties to a judicial tribunal . If that, too, proves unavailing, the dispute would then be referred to arbitration or judicial tribations .
 The usefulness of mediation was demonstrated in the successful outcome of the World Bank’s efforts in promoting the Indus Waters Treaty, and the efficacy and expeditiousness of arbitration in the matter of the boundary dispute .
 In contrast, negotiations between the two countries have a dismal record of failure even in relatively less complicated issues such as the Wullar Barrage and Sir Creek disputes .
 Impartial determination of differences is a necessary component of the strategy for the peaceful settlement and the prevention of use of force, says the U.N. Security Council .
 All civilised polities do not merely forbid the use of force but also provide effective means for the peaceful settlement of disputes . An aggrieved party can bring the recalcitrant to court for compulsory adjudication of a dispute .
 The community of states has yet to attain that state of civilisation . Regrettably, the community of state has not yet reached that state-of-the-art .
 Powerful states prefer instead of the present 'state of nature' in which they can exploit power to impose their own will and deny justice to less powerful neighbours . Powerful states want to exploit power in order to impose its own will .
 Pakistan did not accept the Indian demand for either legitimation of the ceasefire line or an agreement on some new principles for settling the issue . India did not want to legitimate the line or agree on a new principles .
 India's refusal to return to the 1949 ceasefire line was ascribable to transparent political motivation . India’s refusal to re-open the line is ascribeable to transparency political motivation, says Jana .
 If Pakistan does not agree to a settlement of Kashmir on its terms, India felt free to retain the territorial gains it made in war . It sought to convey the message that if Pakistan did not agree, India would retain its territorial gains .
 India took more, but mostly uninhabited mountainous land in the Kargil area . It lost Chamb which supported an agricultural population of 10,000 people .
 Pakistan had no means of compelling India to withdraw to the 1949 ceasefire line . India had no way of compelling Pakistan to withdraw from the 1949 line .
 The two sides kept to the positions they held at the time of ceasefire on 17 December 1971 . As a consequence of the Indian refusal to withdraw to the ceasefire line it became necessary for the two sides to keep their positions .
 The term ‘Line of Control’ was accepted by Pakistan after India agreed to the ‘without prejudice’ clause . Pakistan accepted the term ’Line’ line of control’ after it was agreed to be accepted by India . The term was accepted after the �
 India is claiming the whole of Jammu and Kashmir as an integral part of its territory . Any other interpretation would compromise India’s declared position .
 The clause ‘Line of Control resulting from the ceasefire of 17 December 1971’ could not be deemed to alter the status of Jammu and Kashmir as an outstanding question . The clause 'Line of Cease resulting from ceasefire of December 1971' was not deemed to change the status
 The same sentence in the Shimla Agreement that refers to the Line of Control contains also the key 'without prejudice’ clause . The Shimla agreement contains also a key clause .
 Pakistan cannot compromise Pakistan’s recognised position that Kashmir question has to be resolved in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council . The Kashmir question must be resolved, Pakistan says .
 Not much has been said about the conversations between President Bhutto and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi . Not much was said here about the conversation between Bhuttto and Indira .
 This is by no means an attempt to overlook their role or contribution which was, in fact, crucial to the outcome of the Shimla conference . It is not by all the efforts made by the British delegation to Shimla .
 They were not only the leaders of their delegations but determined the strategy and directed the tactics of the negotiators . They were also determined to determine the strategy of the negotiations .
 Without their eleventh-hour intervention the Shimla conference had been doomed to failure . Without their intervention, Shimla would have failed to reach a consensus of consensus .
 What they said to each other in one-to-one meetings is not, however, a part of the record . The record is not available .
 The Government of Pakistan and the Government of India know only what their then leaders chose to tell them . Pakistan and India's then leaders have been in touch with each other for decades .
 Neither ever said they had secretly agreed to a settlement of the Kashmir question . Neither did they say they agreed to an agreement on Kashmir .
 When Foreign Minister Vajpayee claimed in 1978, that Bhutto and Gandhi had reached a secret understanding on Kashmir at Shimla, the latter publicly rejected the claim as baseless .
 Bhutto contradicted in private meetings with Gandhi the views he voiced in public, says Dhar . Dhar says Bhutte was prepared to betray the Kashmir cause .
 The author, a member of Pakistan’s delegation at the Shimla conference, wrote an article that was published in a subsequent issue of the journal . The author was invited by the Mainstream editor 1 to respond .
 In the first place, Bhutto made no such remark in any meeting with Gandhi at which members of their delegations were present, says Shah .
 If Indira Gandhi told Dhar that Bhutto had made the statement, it is not uncommon for negotiators to claim selfreconstructed accounts of conversations to embellish their own performance and denigrate that of the adversary .
 Dhar’s statement that he gave a secret understanding different from what is contained in the agreement amounts to an allegation of hypocrisy and betrayal against a deceased leader unable to set the record straight, which was, to say the least, in bad taste .
 Dhar knew that Indira Gandhi had refuted Vajpayees claim in 1978 to the existence of a secret understanding between her and Bhutto at Shimla . Dhar said Indira had refuted her claim that she had an agreement with Bhutte .
 No obligation devolves upon a state from an adversary’s claim of a secret and oral understanding allegedly given by a functionary, however high his rank, says the Supreme Court . The Supreme Court has ruled that no obligation must be taken from the state .
 Only agreed minutes of meetings of meetings are of any worth as evidence for interpretation of treaties . Agreement minutes are of no value as evidence of interpretation of international treaties .
 What binds the parties is the text of the agreement as ratified by them . The agreement is signed by the parties, and the text is binding .
 Shimla Agreement explicitly regards lammu and Kashmir as an outstanding question . The Shimla agreement explicitly regards the issue as a 'outstanding question'
 The validity of even an agreement signed under duress is morally if not legally doubtful . Aside from the alleged secret understanding, the validity of such an agreement is morally doubtful .
 The Shimla Agreement was negotiated under circumstances characterised by coercion and blackmail . It was negotiated by blackmail, according to the Shimla agreement .
 India used occupied territory and prisoners to constrain Pakistan into submitting its demands . Pakistan used occupied territories and prisoners as a way to get its demands meted out by India . India's use of occupied territory was used to force Pakistan to submit to its demands.
 A contract dictated under duress is not considered binding in domestic law . Under domestic law, a contract dictated by duress does not bind a contract .
 History records instances of repudiation of treaties after the power equation changed . History records examples of repudiated of treaties by the power balance .
 When Germany denounced the TYeaty of Versailles, even those who had dictated it did not insist on its observance .
 Scholarly opinion went further to blame Britain, France and the U.S. for the diktat which provoked revanchism and led to the Second World War . Scholarly opinions blamed Britain and France for the manifestly unfair dikat .
 India did formally propose conversion of the ceasefire line into an international boundary in one of its drafts . There is no basis on the record for the claim, however .
 Those who argue that ‘the whole of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India’ should remember that at Shimla the Indian government offered to 'give up’ a part of the state .
 Indian constitution can no longer be a credible excuse for denying the right of self-determination to the people of Jammu and Kashmir . The Indian constitution is no longer an excuse to deny the right to self-deterrence .
 Neither Pakistan escaped unscathed in safeguarding its interests nor did India succeed fully in securing its aims . Neither Pakistan nor India succeeded in securing their aims .
 India was persuaded, in fact, to scale down its aims . Even the minimum it spelt out in its final draft was further curtailed as a result of negotiations between Bhutto and Gandhi .
 "Under normal circumstances it would not, and could not, accept the provision regarding bilateral settlement of disputes," the government says .
 The gloom was relieved, however, by the thought that it held no bargaining counters whatsoever . It was relieved by the fact that it was not a bargaining counter .
 An objective appraisal of the Shimla agreement cannot fail to marvel at the extent to which Pakistan managed to extricate itself from the clutches of duress . The Shimla deal is an example of Pakistan's ability to deal with the world's largest powers .
 The credit for this achievement goes to the spirit of the Pakistani people who were defiant in adversity and did not want their government to capitulate . The credit goes to this achievement, the writer says .
 Their willingness to bear with the continued Incarceration of ihclr soldiers and civilians helped the leadership to set the priorities right . The leadership decided to set priorities right.
 It was important to obtain withdrawals from occupied territories first, not only because this enabled a million displaced people to return to their homes, but also because delay in withdrawals incurred the risk of prolonging occupation and distress to refugees .
 Unstinted tribute is due also to President Bhutto and officials such as Aziz Ahmed, who brought great ability and negotiating skill to their difficult task in an unenviable predicament .
 The government was aware that Bangladesh had to be recognised but it could not ignore the feelings of a traumatised nation . The government said it was aware of Bangladesh's need for recognition but it had to acknowledge the country's trauma .
 Miscalculation led it to believe that Pakistani prisoners of war could be used as a lever of pressure to secure satisfaction of its claim to a share of Pakistan’s assets . Miscalculculation led to the use of prisoner of war as leverage .
 It also spoke of its intention to try some of the prisoners on charges of war crimes . It further spoke of the intention of trying some of those held in the camp on war crimes charges .
 Indian officials disclaimed, during discussions at the Shimla conference, that they had encouraged Dhaka to adopt this policy of virtual blackmail .
 Pakistan had few options, but it was obvious that prospects of normalisation of relations in South Asia would be severely damaged if India transferred any of the Pakistani prisoners in its custody to Bangladesh for trials . India would have to transfer any of Pakistan's prisoners to Bangladesh .
 It sought unconditional release as required under international humanitarian law . It sought the unconditional release of the men .
 It took nearly two years for New Delhi and Dhaka to realise that the retention of Pakistani prisoners was a lever of diminishing value . New Delhi realised that it took two years to realise the value of the Pakistani prisoners .
 India became a liability for India, as world opinion became critical of their illegal detention in violation of international humanitarian law . The detention of those held under international law is a violation of the law, according to India .
 The agreement also provided for the transfer of Bengalis from Pakistan to Bangladesh . The agreement was also intended to transfer Bengalis to Bangladesh.
 Pakistan accepted the transfer of a substantial number of non-Bengalis . Over 250,000 persons who had served in the government or had family connections were allowed to migrate to Pakistan .
 Many others said to have ‘opted’ to leave the land of their settlement for Pakistan, remained stranded . As many others, who have ’opted‘to leave’t to Pakistan, remain stranded .
 Pakistan, on its part, did not expel Bengalis who wished to remain Pakistani citizens . Pakistan, however, allowed Bengalis to remain citizens .
 China used its veto to block the release of the Pakistani prisoners, or trying any of them . Nothing did more to convince Dhaka about the inadvisability of blocking the release . China’s veto to bar the admission of Bangladesh into the United Nations did nothing more than that
 In retrospect, China did a great favour to both Bangladesh and Pakistan, says Pakistanis . Pakistanis and Bangladesh were helped by China .
 The question of apportionment of assets and liabilities continued to obstruct development of normal relations between the two countries . The two countries have not been able to reach an agreement over assets or liabilities .
 Pakistan denied that as a part that was sundered by aggression, Bangladesh had a right under international law to any share in the patrimony . Pakistan denies that, as part of the region, Bangladesh has a right to a share of its land .
 Pakistan declined to enter into any discussion on the substance of the issue . On that political ground, Pakistan declines to discuss substance of Pakistan's refusal to accept it .
 Dhaka would have realised that it was to its advantage to adopt the clean-slate principle, which allowed it to disown responsibility for a share of Pakistan’s internal and international debt . Had such a discussion been held, Dhaka .
 Pakistan's liabilities are greater than its assets, an inter-departmental study in Islamabad concluded . Pakistan’s liabilities being greater than assets, the study found . Pakistan's assets are more than Pakistan's debt, the report said .
 Islamabad could have made out a case for Bangladesh to assume a share of the negative balance . Islamabad could also have made an argument for Bangladesh's role in Afghanistan .
 The Lahore Summit was a memorable event for the people of Pakistan . For the first time leaders of fraternal states met together to demonstrate mutual solidarity on all issues of common concern .
 The highest-level congregation ever assembled at the Badshahi Mosque . King Faisal bin Abdul Aziz captured the mood of Muslim people all over the world with tears of joy in his eyes .
 Subhash Chakravartty was an eminently fair-minded journalist, and doyen of the Delhi corps . The author had the privilege to know Subhash during his assignments in New Delhi . Chakravarty was a well-known journalist, who died in hospital last week
 The article was published in Regional Studies, Islamabad, August 1995 . Substantially the same article was later published, with tests of the agreement and various drafts added, in Islamabad .
 Pakistan’s nuclear programme, started in the mid-1950s, aimed at acquiring scientific knowledge and technology for peaceful uses in agriculture and health . Chapter 12 The Nuclear Programme and Relations with the USA. Chapter 12
 It also envisaged the construction of power plants in due course to meet the energy needs of its developing economy . The country's developing economy needs to meet its energy needs .
 The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission obtained a small five megawatt research reactor from the United States in 1962 for the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology near Islamabad . The reactor was part of an agreement with the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 Completed in 1972, this plant, too, was placed under the safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
 It became evident in the early 1960s that India was acquiring nuclear technology not only for peaceful purposes but also to develop weapons . India acquired nuclear technology in the 1960s to develop nuclear weapons . The country's nuclear arsenal is believed to be capable of producing weapons .
 The nuclear fuel cycle facilities would give India the weapons option . India has emphasised peaceful uses in public statements in the past .
 In 1966, PAEC proposed purchase of a plutonium separation plant that France was willing to sell, but the ministries of finance and defence opposed the proposal . President Ayub Khan too, did not favour the idea .
 Military leadership apparently believed that a strong conventional defence capability would suffice for deterrence . Military leadership believed that the U.S. would be able to deter any threat from Russia .
 Pakistan vested hope in Non-Proliferation Treaty and actively participated in efforts at the United Nations to promote its early conclusion . Pakistan has actively participated .
 It joined multi-pronged efforts for a fair bargain between nuclear-weapons states and non-nuclear states . It would provide for the progressive reduction and eventual elimination of nuclear weapons held by nuclear weapon powers in exchange for the renunciation of the nuclear weapon .
 A conference of non-nuclear states recommended that nuclear-weapons states should provide 'negative and 'positive guarantees pledging non-use of nuclear weapons against non-nuke states' At its initiative, the conference recommended that . states should . provide 'positive and 'negative guarantees' pledging non
 The pledge on reduction of nuclear weapons in the NPT remained non-binding . The resolution on security guarantees adopted by the Security Council was far from reassuring . Both proposals were conceded in principle .
 Pakistan has announced its readiness to sign the NPT, provided India did the same . Pakistan says it is ready to sign NPT if India does not sign it . India has not signed NPT .
 Pakistan’s reasonableness contrasted with intransigence on the part of India . India championed nuclear disarmament but at the same time persisted in a programme aimed at the acquisition of the weapons option . Pakistan's reasonablity contrasted with India's intransigeence .
 The 1971 disaster compelled Pakistan to undertake a ‘painful reappraisal’ of its policy of nuclear abstinence . Pakistan was forced to rethink its policy after the nuclear disaster .
 Pakistan’s conventional defence capacity had proved inadequate to safeguard its territorial integrity . East Pakistan was sundered by Indian military intervention to create Bangladesh .
 Pakistan had to devise its own means to ensure its security and survival . Pakistan's security is a key part of the country's survival .
 President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto convened a meeting of nuclear scientists at Multan in January 1972, and later at Quetta, to review the nuclear programme . President Bhuttto took over the reins of government in 1972 .
 Bhutto’s main purpose was to discuss expeditious acquisition of fuel cycle facilities . Already convinced of the necessity of acquiring the weapons option, the main purpose of the meeting was to discuss acquisition of fuel facilities .
 The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission has allocated requisite funds for relevant projects . Munir Ahmad Khan was appointed chairman of the Pakistan atomic Energy Commission .
 The decision to pursue the nuclear option was more easily made than implemented . The decision was made by the president of the United States .
 Nuclear suppliers are already strengthening controls on nuclear technology transfer . Nuclear suppliers were already strengthening .
 Restrictions tightened after India conducted the test explosion in 1974 . Restrictions were further tightened after the tests were carried out in India .
 Canada unilaterally cancelled the cooperation agreement with Pakistan . Pakistan committed no violation of any agreement with Canada, unlike India . Unlike India, unlike Pakistan, it committed no violations of any deal with Canada .
 The United States led other industrialised states in the Nuclear Suppliers Group to tighten restrictions on the export of nuclear technology .
 Few countries criticised India for the May 18 explosion in Pakistan . To Pakistan’s shock, few countries criticised it for its actions .
 Washington’s reaction to Indian nuclear explosion was particularly muted . Washington's reaction to the Indian nuclear blast has been muted .
 Both the USA and the USSR had virtually ruled out explosions for peaceful uses such as digging harbours or canals . For that reason both the U.S. and the Soviet Union had virtually banned explosions .
 The agreement 'ohibited Pakistan from replicating the technology for twenty :ars' The agreement was agreed to allow Pakistan to use the technology .
 Pakistan embarked on imaginative diplomacy to >unter the pressures of the United States and other industrialised mntries. Meanwhile, Pakistan embarked upon imaginative diplomacy .
 In 1974 it proposed a resolution in the UN General ssembly for the establishment of a nuclear weapon-free zone in >uth Asia .
 The UN General Assembly approved the resolution, and ipport for it continued to increase year after year . The resolution was approved by the UN in 2007 .
 India was cornered to virtual isolation, and although that made no dent in its resolve, ikistan gained the moral high ground internationally . The U.S. was exposed as discriminatory .
 Pakistan as able to exploit the opportunity to free-ride India’s intransigence with the United States, 1972-79 . Also, Pakistan as . able to . exploit the . opportunity to . free-rule India . elation* with the U.S. el
 In November 1972, ikistan withdrew from SEATO, but now keen to maintain good lations with the United States, did not withdraw from CENTO which as still valued by Washington .
 Prime Minister Bhutto was invited to visit the U.S. in 1973 . Pakistanis were invited to the United States in 1973 to visit .
 The United States also resumed economic assistance, providing $24 million for heat and $18 million as AID loan . Nixon said, in his banquet speech, ‘The independence id integrity of Pakistan Is a cornerstone of American foreign policy'
 Iso lifted embargo on arms sales to ikistan and allowed purchase of arms and spare parts worth $160 illion . Iso, the Ford administration lifted the embargo on weapons sales to the country .
 India protested, although it received $1,273 million in arms d from the Soviet Union during 1964-73 . India protested . The Soviet Union received the money during that period .
 Bhutto had made no secret his views on Pakistan's nuclear programme . The United States did not accept Pakistani professions of peaceful tent concerning its nuclear programme, Bhuttto said . U.S. didn't accept Pakistan's peaceful intentions .
 When Prime Minister Bhutto refused the proposal, the U.S. pressured France to cancel the contract . The United States pressured the Pakistanis to cancel it .
 Pakistan has embarked on an alternative route for production of fissile material . Providently, Pakistan had embarked on a alternative route to production of such material .
 Khan, was appointed by the government in 1976 to build a uranium enrichment plant at Kahuta . Khan was appointed to build the plant in 1976 . Khan is one of the country's most prominent nuclear scientists . Khan's mission was to enrich uranium at the plant .
 Engineering Research Laboratories faced forbidding technological difficulties and obstacles . U.S. and other members of nuclear suppliers group even refused export of non-nuclear components . The U.N. refused to export nuclear components .
 Iran succeeded in building the key centrifuges indigenously within a few years . But they succeeded in the building of key centrifugs in Iran .
 The government decided to defer the test to avoid political offence to Washington . The test will take place in a bid to avoid a political offence .
 Nominally aimed at nuclear non-proliferation in South Asia, the law in practice singled out Pakistan . It had a built-in loophole to exempt India and Israel fron their purview .
 At first, the Ford administration sought to persuade Pakistan to abandon the nuclear programme . The Ford administration tried to persuade the country to abandon its nuclear programme.
 Bhutto thanked him but said ‘No’, after all senior officials urged the prime minister to decline . All senior officials had urged him to decline, including senior officials .
 Relations between Pakistan and the U.S. slid when Bhutto tried to divert attention from countrywide agitation following the rigged election in 1977, by projecting the United States as his adversary . Relations between the United State and Pakistan have since deteriorated .
 He misinterpreted an intelligence intercept of a remark by an official of the U.S. mission in Pakistan in April, saying, 'My source tells me the party is over’ to mean Bhutto could no longer continue in power .
 Until then the Carter administration had not reviewed the policy of the Ford administration . Until then, Carter administration hadn't reviewed policy of Ford administration policies .
 On April 28, the United States transferred two destroyers to Pakistan under a long-term lease . The day Bhutto accused the U.S. of conspiring against him, the two ships were transferred . The United States navy transferred the destroyers on April 28 .
 President Carter excluded Pakistan from his tour of Asian countries . Carter was the first president to include Pakistan in his Asian tour of Asia .
 Pakistan was concerned that the concept of 'regional influentials’ would encourage and reinforce India’s hegemonic ambitions . Pakistan was also concerned that National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski's concept of ‘regional influence’ was encouraging and reinforcing India
 The slide in Pakistan-U.S. relations accelerated after General Ziaul Haq took over in July 1977 . General Haq was the prime minister of Pakistan's first government .
 U.S. aid to Pakistan of around $50 million a year was cut off . United States aid was also cut off from Pakistan in 2010 .
 Report illustrated the dangerous deterioration in Pakistan-US relations . The state department issued a categorical denial of the report .
 In 1978, President Giscard d’Estaing decided to renege on the reprocessing plant contract, inflicting colossal damage to Pakistan’s nuclear programme .
 By then Pakistan had already paid over a hundred million dollars to the French supplier of equipment . Pakistan paid more than 100 million dollars for equipment .
 France agreed to partially compensate Pakistan for the losses . More than a decade later, France paid Pakistan $100 million in compensation .
 Local police and a security contingent took four hours to come to the rescue . Local police were called to the scene after the incident happened .
 An American and two Pakistani staff members had perished in the fire . By then the premises were burnt and an American and Pakistani staff had perished .
 Pakistan accepted responsibility for failure to fulfil its obligation under international law to protect the diplomatic mission, and immediately agreed to pay compensation . Pakistan accepts responsibility for failing to fulfil international law .
 Pakistan continues to make technological progress towards acquisition of nuclear option . Pakistan continued to make progress towards acquiring the nuclear option. Pakistan continues its technological progress .
 It succeeded not only in completing the Kahuta plant but also in achieving explosion technology, it also achieved explosion technology .
 Scientists at the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission master the design of the nuclear device . The device was designed by Pakistan's atomic energy commission .
 By the mid-1980s, Pakistan publicly acknowledged possession of the capability, although it disclaimed having produced nudear weapons . Pakistan has also acknowledged having the capability .
 The Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan in December 1979 led to U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan . Other strategic imperatives dictated a different priority to the United States, as a result .
 Reagan administration decided to join Pakistan in supporting Afghan resistance against Soviet occupation . Reagan administration came to office in 1981 .
 Indira Gandhi expressed grave concern about progress Pakistan had reportedly made towards acquiring nuclear explosion capability . After she returned to power in January 1980, she expressed concern about Pakistan's progress .
 Pakistan warned it would presume Indian complicity . It was found to be unfeasible, as Pakistan warned India would be involved .
 At the time, the USA was allied with Pakistan as the frontline state in assisting the Afghan Mujahideen against Soviet occupation . The USA and Pakistan were allied in the fight against the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan .
 At Islamabad’s request, the United States ascertained Israel had no intention of joining in any such attack . The U.S. ascertained that Israel was not intending to join in such an attack .
 In September 1984, reports appeared in the U.S. press of Indian military planning for an attack on Pakistan’s nuclear facilities . The attacks on Pakistan's nuclear facilities were reported in September 1984 .
 Rajiv Gandhi considered a pre-emptive attack on Pakistani nuclear facilities in 1987 . He was dissuaded by defence analysts, who said it was a mistake .
 Pakistan was estimated to have accumulated enough enriched uranium for ten or more explosive devices in 1990 . By 1990, Pakistan had accumulated enough uranium for 10 or more devices .
 Under the Atoms for Peace plan, the USA provided training facilities for foreign scientists and engineers . Under the program, the U.S. trained foreign scientists .
 Between 1955 and 1974 1,104 Indians trained at the Argonne Laboratory School of Nuclear Science and Engineering and ‘mined’ the declassified literature for design and operation of nuclear facilities . Between 1955-1974 1,102 Indians trained in the school .
 India built the first research reactor ASPARA in 1955 with the assistance of the UK which provided the heavy water . ASPARA was India's first nuclear research reactor .
 CIRUS, a 40 megawatt research reactor suitable for generation of bomb-grade plutonium was built with the assistance of Canada . Canada accepted the Indian statement that it would use the resultant fissile material for peaceful purposes only .
 In 1961 India began construction of the Phoenix plant for reprocessing plutonium . The Phoenix plant began construction in 1961 .
 Vitro International, was the contractor for preparing the construction blueprints, while technological assistance was provided by the British Atomic Energy Commission . Vitro also provided technological assistance for the project .
 In 1963 the United States decided to provide two reactors for the Tarapur power plant . The U.S. provided two reactors to build the plant .
 Years later the Indian scientist who played a leadership role acknowledged it was actually a bomb test . Years later, the scientist who led the project acknowledged that it had been a test .
 It did not consider it necessary to conduct another test until the Bharatiya Janata party came to power . The test was carried out before the election of the new government .
 Under Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayees directive India, on 11 May 1998, tested three nuclear weapons and again two more two days later . India tested the nuclear weapons on May 11, 1998 .
 The United States condemned the tests publicly but once again accepted the reality . The U.S. condemned the test, but accepted it was necessary .
 President Bill Clinton paid an unprecedented six-day visit to India in early 2000 . Bill Clinton visited India in 2000 for a six-week visit .
 In 2005, President George W Bush agreed to extend technological cooperation to India for nuclear power plants . President Bush proposed an India-specific exception to United States non-proliferation laws .
 Former PAEC scientists who participated in a meeting in Islamabad on 29 April 2005 to commemorate the sixth death anniversary of Munir Ahmad Khan . Meeting did not diacuaa the queetion of making a bomb . Meeting was held in Islamabad to commemorate 6th death anniversary .
 Deserved tributes were paid for Munir's seminal role in developing the nuclear programme as PAEC chairman . Munir recognised his extraordinary discretion in public statements, recognising the danger in flaunting the PAEC's great contribution .
 Kissinger rejected a draft prepared by a state department official that criticised India for undermining non-proliferation efforts . Kissinger rejected the draft draft . Kissinger: "India's nuclear programme has been a problem for decades"
 Secret state department memorandum of 13 September 1961 quoted in Perkovich, op. cit., 52. Secret state of state department memo of 13 Sept. 1961 quoted as quoted as 52. 1 .
 Released record of State Department meeting on 9 July 1976, reported in Dawn, Islamabad .
 Air Marshal Zulfiqar Ali Khan advised against accepting the conditional offer of sale of aircraft because he believed acquisition of the nuclear option was more important in the longer perspective .
 Interview on Radio Pakistan by Dr Samar Mubarakmand, senior scientist of PAEC . Dr Mubarakmand is a senior scientist at the PAEC.
 Pakistan has capacity to produce nuclear weapons but has not actually done so . Pakistani spokesman reiterated in 1994 that Pakistan has the capacity to make nuclear weapons . Pakistan has not produced nuclear weapons since 1994 .
 When the author, then ambassador to India, called on her after her election victory, she seemed obsessed with reports of Pakistan's nuclear programme .
 This section has benefited greatly from George Perkovich, India's nuclear tomb . This section is dedicated to the legacy of the Indian nuclear power .
 Munir Ahmad Khan, ‘Nuclearisation of South Asia and hs Regional and Qobal Implications', Regional Studies, Islamabad, Pakistan, Autumn 1998 . Khan: 'Nuclearising South Asia has implications for the rest of Asia'
 Few other countries are closer to Pakistan in culture and history than Afghanistan . Chapter 13 The Afghanistan Crisis . The Afghanistan crisis is the result of the Taliban insurgency in Afghanistan .
 The Afghan government denounced the treaty Amir Abdurrahman concluded in 1893, establishing the Durand Line as the boundary with British India . The treaty established in 1893 was the boundary between Afghanistan and India .
 It launched a territorial claim, in the guise of support for ‘Pushtoonistan’ which it wanted to be carved out of Pakistan . It wanted to carve out Pakistan out of the country .
 Afghanistan was the only country to vote against Pakistan’s admission to the U.N. Pakistan was admitted to the United Nations in 2007 .
 In the decades that followed, relations between the two neighbours remained strained though fortunately, tensions were kept under control . In the years following the war, tensions remained under control between the countries .
 Afghan government did not exploit Pakistan's vulnerability during the wars with India . Afghan government didn't exploit Pakistan during the Afghan-Pakistan wars . Pakistan did not use its vulnerability to exploit it during those wars .
 Sardar Mohammad Daoud assumed power on 17 July 1973, supplanting King Mohammad Zahir Shah, his cousin and brother-in-law . As he was a known Pakistan-baiter, apprehensions of deterioration of bilateral relations rose in Islamabad .
 Daoud entered into close relations with the Soviet Union . Aimed to use Soviet support to consolidate his power at home and pursue the Irredenta .
 By 1976 Daoud appeared to have realised that the Soviets had an agenda of their own . Daoud appears to have appeared to realise that they had a different agenda .
 Daoud embarked on efforts to improve relations with Pakistan, Iran and other Muslim countries . Daoud wanted to counterbalance the Soviet influence of Soviet influence .
 General Ziaul Haq assumed power in Pakistan in July 1977 . Bilateral relations continued to improve after General Haq took over Pakistan .
 The contest culminated in a coup on 27 April 1978 that PDPA called the ‘Saur Revolution’ The coup was a coup that led to the overthrow of the country's government .
 Daoud and members of his family were murdered, the constitution was abrogated and a revolution proclaimed by a clique of communist intellectuals . Daoud was killed and his family was forced to flee .
 From the beginning the new regime was faced with opposition in the traditional and conservative Afghan society . The new regime has faced opposition in Afghanistan's conservative and traditional society .
 The party was riven with rivalry between its predominantly rural and Pushto-speaking Khalq, and urban-based Persian-speaking Parcham, factions . Also the party was also riven by rivalry between the predominantly . and . rural and . Pushto .speaking Pushtto
 He was succeeded by Hafizullah Amin, whose radical reforms evoked even stronger opposition from the Afghan people . Amin's radical reform policies evoked strong opposition from his Afghan people.
 He was considered by his rivals in the party, and by the Soviets, to be endangering the stability of the revolution . Headstrong and defiant of Soviet guidance, he was considered to be headstrong .
 On 26 December 1979, the Soviet forces rolled into Afghanistan, eliminated Amin and installed Babrak Karmal, leader of the Parcham faction, as president in his place . Amin was killed by Soviet forces in December 1979 .
 The Soviet pretext of an invitation by the Afghan government for intervention by its forces was obviously false, as its target was none other than the head of that government . The pretext of a Soviet invasion by Afghan forces was false, and the target of the Soviet invasion was the Afghan head of the
 The buffer disappeared and the Soviet superpower advanced to Pakistan’s borders . Suddenly the buffer disappeared, the Soviet superpowers advanced to the borders .
 Security strategists believed that if allowed to consolidate its hold, the Soviet Union could later leap down the Bolan and Khyber passes to fulfil the historical czarist ambition for access to the Arabian Sea .
 Anxiety was enhanced by the realisation that Pakistan was deeply divided internally and isolated internationally . Anxiety was heightened by the fact that Pakistan is deeply divided internal and international .
 The rigging of elections by Prime Minister Bhutto in 1977, the countrywide agitation that brought the economy to the edge of ruin, and the overthrow in a military coup, had polarised opinion at home as never before . Bhut to was hanged in April 1979 upon conviction on a
 Pakistan's reaction to Soviet intervention was visceral, but in deciding policy it sought to exercise prudence . Pakistan’s reaction to the Soviet intervention in the 1980s was visceral . Pakistan's response was visceral but it sought prudence.
 It was ‘fully conscious of the risks of antagonising and pitting itself against a superpower.’ It was 'fully conscious’ of ‘anxiety’ and ‘risking antagonising’ the U.S.
 It also realised that acquiescence in the fait accompli would entail even greater dangers . But it also realised it would be even more dangerous if it acquiesce in the process . It is not the first time the government has taken steps to take action .
 The UN described it as a ‘serious violation’ of the norms of peaceful coexistence and the principles of the UN Charter . Instead it referred to the ‘induction of foreign troops’ and said it was a serious violation of the peace norms and principles .
 Pakistan noted the strong reaction of the U.S. and West European countries 1 but, apprehensive of the possibly dangerous implications of involvement in the Cold War, it hitched its diplomacy to the hope of a political resolution of the crisis through the United Nations .
 It was assumed that Moscow, however cynical, could not dismiss the world's condemnation of the world, including the Western and especially Islamic and non-aligned nations . Russia is accused of trying to cover up for its actions in Syria .
 At Islamabad’s request, the resolution neither named the Soviet Union nor used the stronger word ‘condemnation’ at the request of the Pakistani government . The resolution did not use the stronger ‘Condemnation.’
 Foreign Minister Agha Shahi ably piloted these resolutions . The USSR suffered a severe blow to its image. Foreign Minister Shahi piloted them .
 Not only the Western bloc but also fifty-six out of ninety-two members of the Non-Aligned Movement voted for the resolution . Most of the rest abstained .
 In December, the Indian Prime Minister, Charan Singh, issued a strong statement condemning the intervention .
 Indira Gandhi adopted a pro-Soviet stance after her government lost the election in January 1980 .
 The Indian statement in the General Assembly did not criticise the Soviet intervention . It accepted the Soviet explanation that its limited forces would be withdrawn after a limited period .
 Her cynical view was not surprising, as India itself had refused to comply with the UN resolutions on Kashmir . India itself has not complied with UN resolutions, she said .
 In the NAM Coordinating Bureau, they sabotaged a resolution on Afghanistan . The NAM has been accused of being anti-Afghanistan in the past .
 Organisation of the Islamic Conference foreign ministers held in Islamabad on 29 January . Extraordinary session was held in an attempt to mobilise world opinion on Moscow .
 The resolution adopted by the meeting proclaimed a strong indictment of the Soviet intervention . The resolution was adopted by a meeting of the Soviets in Moscow .
 More critical to the outcome of the crisis than censure abroad wai the opposition to the Soviet intervention inside Afghanistan . The Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was crucial to the success of the Soviet invasion .
 Afghans engaged in partisan resistance against the PDPA since it grabbed power in 1978 . A traditional people with a sense of pride in their history, having challenged and defeated colonial Britain’s invasions a century earlier the Afghans were engaged in .
 Pakistan was sympathetic to the Afghan cause, but caution and lack of resources limited the support and assistance it could provide to the Mujahideen . Pakistan had little resources to spare .
 Self-interest was the clinching ationale of the decision . Besides the motivation f solidarity with the Afghan people, the decision was self-interest . The decision was made in solidarity with Afghanistan's people .
 In fighting for their national survival, the Mujahideen would be fighting also for Pakistan’s own security and -(dependence) in Pakistan, says Ravi Khan .
 Pakistan’s decision to assist the jihad was nade autonomously, without foreign instigation . The U.S. CLA also began to provide some assistance 3 the Afghan resistance . Pakistan's decision to help the jihad nade independently from abroad .
 Pakistan was anxious to preclude any impression of cting at the behest of the U.S. or wanting to push Afghanistan nto the Cold War . Wary of the onsequences, Pakistan is anxious to avoid any impression .
 The initial thrust of Pakistan’s policy was diplomatic in orientation . Pakistan sought to build up greater political pressure on the oviet Union at the regular session of the UN General Assembly in 980 .
 A group of like-minded non-aligned countries from Africa, Asia nd Latin America coordinated by Kuwait prepared an elaborate draff esohition that suggested the outlines of a political solution .
 The omponents included immediate withdrawal of the foreign forces, preservation of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence nd non-aligned status of Afghanistan, respect for the right of its ieople to determine their own form of government .
 Negative votes and abstentions combined declined from 30ix in 1980 to 30 in 1987 . Negative votes in 1980s to 30x in 1987; negative votes in 1987 were 30x .
 The Soviet invasion appeared to shake the U.S. out of indifference, but hardly enough for Pakistan to conclude it could be counted upon to review its policy toward Pakistan . Pakistan was attacked by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the summer of 1968 .
 Had consultations been held, Islamabad would have sought a guarantee of American assistance in the event of Soviet or a Soviet-backed Indian attack on Pakistan .
 1959 executive agreement on defence cooperation into a binding treaty . To that end, it needed the upgradation of the 1959 agreement . The 1959 agreement needed to be upgraded into a treaty .
 President Ziaul Haq later said the 'credibility and durability’ 1 of American assurances was low, founded in the widely held belief that at critical junctures, especially in 1965 and 1971, the United States had betrayed a friend and ally .
 The United States President announced an offer of $400 million in economic and military assistance for Pakistan over 18 months . Without consultation with Islamabad, the U.S. President announced the offer . The offer was made without consultation with Pakistan .
 Islamabad believed the defence component would enhance risks of reinvolvement in the Cold War . Islamabad believed that the defence part of the deal would enhance the risks of re-involvement . Islamabad said it was not prepared to engage in Cold War with Russia .
 The aid package was 'wrapped up in onerous conditions’ and these could affect Pakistan’s pursuit of nuclear programme . These could affect the pursuit of the nuclear programme thus ‘denuding of relevance to our defensive capacity.’
 This word ridiculing the amount of the offer gave the wrong impression that what Islamabad wanted was larger aid . The offer was ridiculing, it gave the impression that Islamabad wanted larger aid, he said .
 Pakistan was prepared to accept $200 million in economic assistance but not the other half for defence . Pakistan was also prepared for $200million in economic aid but not for defence aid .
 For more than a year it continued to support the Afghan resistance, also providing it modest assistance out of its own meagre resources .
 Non-acceptance of U.S. aid in 1980 reduced the risk of plunging Pakistan back into the Cold War orbit . Pakistan's refusal to accept aid from the United States reduced risk of Cold War . Pakistan has never been in the orbit of a Cold War.
 It also helped in projecting the Afghan cause in its genuine perspective of the liberation struggle . The Afghan cause was also a real perspective of a liberation struggle.
 It served, moreover, to save Pakistan’s relations with Iran from further strain . The move served, however, to help save Pakistan from further strains .
 The Iranian media perception of Pakistan as a proxy for U.S. interests in the region was painful to Pakistanis . Pakistanis value Iran as a friend and a fraternal neighbour .
 Washington revived the offer of cooperation with Pakistan in 1981 . After President Ronald Reagan succeeded Carter in 1981, the offer was revived .
 By April, the United States decided on a new package, with loans and grants amounting to three billion dollars over five years . The U.S. decided on the new package in April .
 The amount of $600 million a year for development and defence was a significant improvement over the Carter offer of $400 million for 18 months . Carter had offered $400m for $600m a year .
 The new offer still did not address Pakistan’s concerns about defence against the Soviets or Soviet-aided Indian threat . Pakistan still does not believe the new offer would address its concerns .
 The United States side explained that Congressional opinion was reluctant to support a formal security guarantee to Pakistan . The U.S. side said it was a matter of concern with Pakistan's sovereignty .
 The administration evinced a reassuring understanding of Pakistan’s vulnerabilities as a front-line state . The administration, however, evinsed a reassuring sense of the vulnerabilities .
 As an earnest of United States concern for Pakistan’s security, it agreed to consider the sale of 40 F-16 aircrafts . Pakistan agreed to sell the aircrafts to the U.S.
 The 5-year programme generated an aura of durability around the U.S. commitment . Also, the programme generated a . aura of commitment around the United States commitment .
 Pakistan and the U.S. maintain formal positions on the nuclear issue . Pakistan reiterates its intention to continue research, the United States proclaims its non-proliferation concern .
 Secretary of State Alexander Haig indicated that the nuclear was no longer the priority issue . Secretary of state Haig said the nuclear is no longer a priority issue in the U.S.
 Later, it secured Congressional approval for a waiver of the Symington prohibition . Later, the government secured congressional approval for the waiver .
 Senators and Congressmen who targeted Pakistan for discriminatory sanctions no longer commanded decisive influence . Senators and . Congressmen no longer command decisive influence in the United States .
 Pakistan chose not to accept concessional loans for military sales . Instead opted to pay the market rate of interest, so as to safeguard its non-aligned credentials . Pakistan chose to pay market rates of interest instead of paying concessions to the government .
 Islamabad wanted to retain credibility as an independent actor in the hope of persuading the Soviet Union to agree to a political solution of the Afghanistan question outside the Cold War context . Islamabad was hoping to persuade the Soviet Russia to agree on a solution outside Cold War .
 In the event, the sacrifice won no appreciation from either Moscow or New Delhi . The sacrifice won't be appreciated from either Russia or Delhi .
 A year earlier India had signed a deal with the USSR for the latest MIG aircraft, T-72 tanks and warships, etc. for a give-away price of $1. billion on soft terms, though the market value was estimated at $6 billion .
 In retrospect, Pakistan’s more-pious-than-the-Pope posture did not yield commensurate political advantage . Pakistan's more than the Pope posture was not a political advantage, it was a mistake, it said .
 UN efforts to promote a political solution began in earnest with the appointment of Diego Cordovez, a senior UN official from Ecuador, in 1981 .
 Iran declined to participate arguing that the Soviet withdrawal should be unconditional . Pakistan was unwilling to meet with the Afghan regime which it did not recognize . Iran refused to participate .
 Soviet Union refused to join talks taking the position that its forces entered Afghanistan at Kabul’s invitation and would be withdrawn when Kabul no longer wanted their presence . Kabul sent high-level officials to Geneva to be available for consultation, but they refused to participate .
 Negotiations began in Geneva in June 1982 with exploration of the structure of a settlement that would integrate the components of the UN General Assembly resolution . The settlement would have to be made up of all components of a UN resolution .
 To satisfy the Soviet demand for American commitment to noninterference, he conceived the idea of guarantees by both superpowers . The idea was conceived to satisfy the Soviets' demand for non-interference .
 Moscow was confident that its mighty forces equipped with the latest weapons would rout the ragtag Mujahideen armed with antiquated rifles . Moscow had hoped to defeat the Taliban in the Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 The Afghan government misjudged the situation, as it could not pin down the Mujahideen guerrillas . The Taliban received sophisticated weapons from the United States for guerrilla warfare . The U.S. failed to pin down its forces in Afghanistan .
 After the death of the hard-liner Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev, in November 1982, hopes rose for a political settlement . The death of hard-line Soviet leader was in 1982, but hopes rose after his death .
 UN Secretary General Perez de Cuellar and Diego Cordovez, who met Andropov in March 1983, received ‘new encouragement’ for pursuing UN mediation .
 Andropov counted out to them the reasons why the Soviet Union wanted a solution to the problem . The Soviet Union had been trying to solve the problem for decades .
 Soviet loss of prestige in the Third World could cost lives and money, he said . Raising his fingers one by one he mentioned costs in lives, money, regional tensions, setback to detente and loss of Soviet prestige . He also mentioned regional tensions and regional tensions .
 Cordovez successfully pressed the two sides in the 1983 April and June rounds of Geneva talks to agree on the components of a comprehensive settlement . The two sides have since agreed a comprehensive agreement .
 These included an agreement on non-interference and not intervention, guarantees by third states, and arrangements for the voluntary return of refugees .
 Cordovez was optimistic and envisaged 'gradual withdrawal’ of Soviet forces within a reasonable timeframe . Cordovesz envisaged withdrawal of Soviet troops within a 'reasonable timeframe' He envisaged gradual withdrawal of forces from Soviet forces in time for a reasonable period of time .
 The Soviet-Kabul side dragged their feet, indicating that the hardliners were marking time as Andropov was ailing . The hardliners may have been marking time for the former Soviet leader's health .
 After he died, they reverted to the policy of a military solution . The policy continued under Konstantin Chernenko and Mikhail Gorbachev till the end of 1987 .
 The struggle in Afghanistan was unequal but the Mujahideen demonstrated courage and resourcefulness in resistance, writes John Sutter . Sutter says the struggle in the country was unequal .
 The U.S. raised covert allocations for supply of arms to the Mujahideen, from $250 million in 1985 to $470 million in 1986 and $630 million in 1987 . The United States raised covert allocation of arms in 1985 and 1987 .
 Pakistan calibrated the flow of assistance to the Mujahideen cautiously so as to minimise the risk of spillover of the conflict . China, Iran and several other countries provided significant assistance to Pakistan . Pakistan became bolder with time and experience .
 It realised that a super-power’s forces could not be defeated militarily but also that attrition inside Afghanistan combined with blows to its prestige internationally offered the only hope of wearing Moscow down .
 Negotiations in Geneva and resolutions in OIC, NAM and U.N. were a part of that strategy for increasing political pressure . OIC and NAM resolutions were part of the strategy to increase political pressure on Syria .
 Diego Cordovez patiently kept the Geneva talks on track, however slow their pace . The talks are expected to continue until the end of the year .
 He and the Pakistani side occasionally discussed the question of a compromise between the Kabul regime and the Mujahideen, but this subject was not on the agenda . The Afghan government and the Taliban are still at odds in Afghanistan .
 UN resolutions referred to the principle of respect for the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and economic system, but this was not interpreted as requiring replacement of the regime installed by the Soviet forces .
 Kabul and Moscow at first refused even to recognise the reality of internal resistance . Moscow and Kabul and Kabul initially refused to even recognise the fact of the reality .
 Cordovez himself realised the need for a compromise among the Afghans but as he said, correctly for the time, ‘The UN is not in the business of establishing governments’""
 70 per cent of Afghan refugees in Pakistan favoured Zahir Shab’s return . A poll organized by Professor Syed Bahauddin Majrooh, a prominent Afghan scholar, found the support .
 When Majrooh was later assassinated, opponents of the king were suspected of having organised the crime . Opponents of the King were suspected to have organised the murder .
 By mid-1987 the Soviets wanted 18 months for ithdrawal while Pakistan went up to seven months . The Soviets wanted an 18-month period while Pakistan wanted seven-month wait .
 The issue was ot to be settled until after the failure of the Soviet military offensive i the summer of 1987 . The issue is not settled until the end of that summer .
 By then, the imperatives of democratic and conomic reforms at home necessitated an end to confrontation with the West . By then the imperative of democratic . and conomomic reforms . at home . at . home . necessitated a end to . confrontation with . the West,
 Islamabad did not accordie much attention to the idea much attention .
 Engineer iulbuddin Hekmatyar, Professor Burhanuddin Rabbani and Maulvi unus Khalis ruled out any role for the king . Professor Rabbani also ruled out a role in the king's life .
 Since resistance against the Soviets still ommanded priority, it was considered inadvisable to press the Mujahideen lest that should divide and weaken the Alliance .
 Gorbachev and Shevardnadze succeeded in winning the endorsement f the Politburo of the communist party for the policy of terminating lilitary involvement in Afghanistan . The Soviet Union ended its involvement in the country in the 1980s .
 The costs of the policy in iUman and material resources were glaringly disproportionate, even in the oviet Union’s non-aligned backyard . The costs, including material resources and the obquiry it entailed, are glaringly . disproportionate o any benefits that continued hold
 The lew generation of communists no longer shared the pristine deological fervour of the founders or faith in the inevitability of ommunism’s victory . Instead, the lew generations of communists were more sceptical of the ideals of communism .
 The Soviet system was faltering, the conomy was in decline and the people were alienated . In fact, the Soviet system had been faltering . The people in the USSR were alienated from each other .
 Gorbachev announced in 1987 that the Soviet forces would withdraw from Afghanistan within 12 months of the conclusion of the Geneva Accords . During that period, the forces would not engage in combat .
 Gorbachev also delinked the question of withdrawal from an internal settlement in Afghanistan . Gorbavachev: "Afghanistan is not a matter of Afghanistan"
 Moscow was not prepared to allow the Alliance’s rejectionist attitude to obstruct its decision to extricate the Soviet Union from the Afghan quagmire .
 The Kabul regime was not willing to undertake the removal of the Kabul regime and hand over the government to the Mujahideen Alliance . Nor was it willing to take over the Kabul government and hand it over to the Taliban .
 Dark clouds suddenly appeared on the horizon in Pakistan . Just as prospects for the conclusion of the Geneva Accords brightened, dark clouds appeared on horizon .
 In January 1988, President Zia took the position that the conclusion of the Accords should be postponed until after agreement was reached on the formation of a government in Kabul with the participation of the Mujahideen . In 1988, Zia said that the end of the Accord should be
 Zia pressed the visiting Soviet First Deputy Foreign Minister Yuli Vorontsov for postponement of the final Geneva round . Zia's comment was withering to the point of insolence .
 His new policy reversed Pakistan’s oft stated position, namely that the only remaining obstacle to the Geneva Accords was an acceptable tune frame for the withdrawal of Soviet forces . The new policy reverses Pakistan's oft stated stance .
 Pakistan could not prevent the Soviets withdrawing from Afghanistan either unilaterally or pursuant to an agreement with the Kabul regime . Pakistan could block the Geneva Accords, but it could not stop the Soviets from withdrawing .
 In comparison with these alternatives, withdrawal under the Accords was decidedly more advantageous . withdrawal under these alternatives is more advantageous, says the author .
 The Soviet Union would be internationally bound to withdraw its forces completely, within a prescribed timeframe and under UN monitoring . UN monitoring would be required to see the Soviet Union withdraw completely .
 It would be legally bound also to refrain from intervention in Afghanistan . The U.S. would also have to refrain in Afghanistan from intervening .
 Pakistan, too, would receive Soviet and United States guarantees of respect for principles of non-interference and nonintervention . Pakistan would also receive guarantees from the Soviet and U.S. guarantees of noninterference .
 Moscow considered the manner of disengagement so as to avoid danger to their retreating forces and further humiliation for the Soviet Union . For Moscow, the residual consideration now was the way to disengage .
 It prized the Geneva Accords because contained in them was a commitment to observe principle of non-interference and non-Intervention . The Geneva Accord was signed by the U.N. on January 1, 1994 . It was signed up to the Geneva Accord, signed by Russia in
 Pakistan and the U.S. would be under an obligation to discontinue assistance to the Mujahideen . The United States and Pakistan are under a obligation to stop providing assistance to terrorists .
 UN-sponsored agreement would provide a fig leaf to cover the Soviet defeat . UN-backed agreement would give a fig-leaf cover to cover Soviet defeat, says Russian diplomat .
 Pakistan could only gain by sparing humiliation to the Soviet Union . As for Pakistan, it would only gain if it spared humiliation to Soviet Union. Pakistan was not willing to give up on Soviet Union, it said .
 Pakistan's relations with the U.S. could improve if it were to improve relations with China . That would open the possibility for Pakistan to improve its relations with this superpower . Pakistan is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, an engineer by training but with an impressive grasp of law, contributed to the improvement of the Geneva texts . He was an engineer but also an expert in law .
 Pakistani officials suggested two significant modifications to Pakistan's constitution . President Obama suggested two modifications to the constitution .
 Pakistan’s signature on an agreement with Afghanistan would constitute recognition of the Kabul regime, he said . He pointed out that signing of a deal with the Afghan regime would be recognition of Kabul regime .
 The agreement would require discontinuation of arms supply to ‘rebels’ but not to the Kabul regime .
 Vorontsov was informed that Pakistan would publicly state that the signing of the agreement would not constitute recognition of the Kabul regime . In friendly conversations at the foreign office in February 1988, he said .
 A diplomat of world class, confident in his understanding of his country's policy and decisive in negotiations, he instantly agreed not to make this matter an issue .
 On the Soviet side, he convincingly explained, Moscow could not go back on its existing commitments to Kabul . The Soviet-led NATO mission was based in Kabul, he said .
 The discussion served to preclude subsequent misunderstanding between Islamabad and Moscow . The discussion also served to prevent misunderstanding between the two countries .
 Pakistan delegation did not have authorisation to finalise the Accords . The talks proceeded in slow motion because the Pakistan delegation had no authorisation . The Pakistan delegation was not authorised to complete the talks .
 The Soviets conveyed their agreement to reduce the timeframe for withdrawal to nine months . On their part, the Soviets also agreed to reduce their withdrawal from the Soviet Union .
 Kabul representatives still persisted in their objection to the phrase existing internationally recognised boundaries’ 25 and suggested its substitution by the words 'international borders’ Pakistan considered it an artificial issue .
 The replacement of the Kabul regime was never a part of the Geneva negotiations . Diego Cordovez said in a statement issued on 8 April that the objective of a comprehensive settlement... can best be ensured by a broad-based Afghan Government .
 By that time Zia realised that the formation of such a government could not be made a precondition for the conclusion of the Accords . Zia was forced to form a government in order to reach the end of the agreement .
 Foreign ministers of Afghanistan, Pakistan, and the Soviet Union signed the Geneva Accords on 14 April 1988 . The Soviet Union and the Secretary of State of the U.S. signed the treaty .
 Pakistan and the United States declared, on the occasion, that their signatures did not imply recognition of the Kabul regime . The U.S. and Pakistan have declared that they do not recognize the Taliban regime .
 The U.S. retained the right to provide military assistance to the Afghan parties, and would exercise restraint should the Soviet Union do so, too . The United States declared that ‘the obligations undertaken by the guarantors are symmetrical’
 Pakistan also made the same point, and underlined the right of the Afghan people to self-determination . Pakistan also highlighted the rights of Afghan people .
 The Geneva Accords marked the first time for the Soviet Union to agree to withdraw from a ‘fraternal’ state . It was first time they agreed to withdraw .
 Afghanistan misadventure could well be considered the proverbial last straw that broke the cameTs back . A classic example of ‘imperial over-stretch,’ 2 * the Afghanistan misdventure could be considered a last straw .
 To say that the Soviet Union lost the war in Afghanistan is by no means to undervalue the courage and heroism of the Mujahideen, the Afghan people . Like the United States in Vietnam, the U.S. lost its war in Vietnam due to pressures of domestic and international
 For an authoritative account of Pakistan’s policy in the Afghanistan crisis, see Former Foreign Minister Agha Shahi, Pakistan's Security and Foreign Policy, Progressive Publishers .
 The United States State Department issued a prompt condemnation of the ’blatant’ Soviet intervention . The U.S. State Department said the intervention was ‘blatants’
 President Carter called the intervention a 'grave threat to peace' proclaimed a boycott of the Moscow Olympics and suspended arms limitation talks with Moscow . President Carter also suspended arms restrictions talks with Russia .
 He expressed concern over the Soviet advance to ‘within striking distance of the Indian Ocean and even the Persian Gulf...an area of vital strategic and economic significance to the survival of Western Europe, the Far East, and ultimately the United States’ West European, too .
 Washington had remained quiescent following the communist coup by the PDPA in April 1978 . President Carter had hardly reacted to the murder of American ambassador Adolph Dubs in Kabul in February of that year .
 President Zia in NBC-TV 'Face the Nation' interview with Walter Cronkite, 18 May 1980 . Zia was the first president of Soviet Union to be elected to power .
 The package included $150 million in economic aid for F’82 and $3 billion for economic assistance and military sales credits for the period F'83-F'87 . The package also included economic assistance for F'82-87 .
 The package was carefully negotiated so as to increase the grant componeit for economic support funds . The package is carefully negotiated in order to increase funding .
 The defence component was initially 8 per cent. Still the interest differentia] on the defence component . Still . Still, the interest . differentia]. on the . defence component [initially]. was initially .8 per cent . The interest .differentia] was initially eight per cent
 As interest rates changed in subsequent years, the differential was reduced . The differential between interest rates and interest rates has been reduced .
 The follow-up agreement remained in force only for three years until 1990 . It provided for $700 million a year and the interest rate on military sales credits was reduced to below the market rate .
 Untying the Afghan Knot, provides authoritative information on Pakistan's diplomacy and the UN-mediated negotiations leading to the Geneva Accords in April 1988 . Untying The Afghan Knot is the work of Pakistan's diplomats and the negotiations leading up to the Accords .
 Statement by Shevardnadze in a meeting of the Central Committee of CPSU in 1989 . USSR spent over 2,000 billion rubles on maintaining occupation of East European countries, creation of defence structure on the border with China .
 As ambassadors in New Delhi for four years around 1980 they established amicable relations of mutual trust . As ambassadors they established an amicable relationship .
 This phrase was derived from the 1981 UN Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention and Interference in the Internal Affairs of States . The 1981 Declaration was based on the 1981 Declaration . This phrase is derived from a UN Declaration .
 Agha Shahi, 93, was assassinated in March 1988 . Shahi was killed by a bomb in the Soviet Union in 1988 . He was shot in the head of a pro-democracy movement .
 Arif, 237, is based on statements by General Alexei Lizichev and Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov . Arif is Arif's first article on Arif. Arif .
 At the Shirala conference in 1972, Pakistan neither compromised its own position on the Kashmir question nor allowed any prejudice to the right of self-determination of the people of Kashmir . The Struggle for Azadi was published by Pakistan in 1972 .
 Pakistan has continued to draw attention of the world community to the festering issue . Pakistan continued to speak in speeches in the UN General Assembly in speeches .
 The people of Indian-held Kashmir grasped every opportunity to protest against the denial of their fundamental right to self-determination . Meanwhile, groaning under occupation and suppression, the people of India-held .
 In 1973, the valley exploded in protest following the discovery of a book in a library in Anantnag with a drawing of the Prophet . The valley exploded after discovery of the book in library with a picture of the prophet .
 Sheikh Abdullah was installed as chief minister once again, to exploit whatever support he still had in order to pacify the people . As disaffection continued to intensify, the Indian government installed Sheikh Abdullah again .
 President Obama submitted to Indian terms after a long period in the political wilderness . He was elected to power after a decade of political struggle . He has been in office since 2001 .
 The people of Kashmir denounced him, and the Government of Pakistan condemned him for this new perfidy . Kashmir people denounced him and the government condemned him, the government said .
 For the few years he remained alive, he had to rely on protection by the Indian police . For the rest of his life, he was protected by police in India .
 Kashmiris in England kidnapped an Indian consular official and killed him in 1984 . The Indian government refused to meet their demand for the release of a popular Kashmiri activist from jail in Delhi . In February 1984, a group of Kashmiris killed an Indian official in England .
 The Kashmiri agitation gathered momentum as Indira Gandhi tried to suppress it by appointing a proven martinet as governor in Srinagar . Indira tried to contain the movement by appointing an martinet as governor in Kashmir . Kashmiri aggressions gathered momentum as
 When that did not work, Jagmohan imposed his own direct rule, in March 1986 . When that failed to work, he imposed a direct rule on the country .
 In September 1986, six months prior to the election in Indian-held Kashmir, several popular political parties formed a United Muslim Front .
 Front’s young activists galvanised mass support . Believing they could secure their political aspirations through the peaceful electoral process .
 The announcement that the United Front had won a token four out of seventy-six seats only added insult to injury . The United Front won only four seats in the National Assembly .
 Kashmiri activists resort to ‘other means’ to secure their fundamental rights . With hope in the peaceful process betrayed, the shocked and thoroughly disillusioned activists decided to resort to other means .
 The Indian government responded with a heavy hand, evoking strong condemnation in Pakistan . As the Indian government responds, its policy evoked strong condemnation from Pakistan .
 In IHK, radical Kashmiri youth turned to militancy . Not only was normalisation of Pakistan-India relations halted, much of the progress made since it began in 1972 .
 An attempt was made to attack Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah in May 1987 . An attempt to attack the Chief Minister was made against him in 1987 .
 In December, the daughter of the Indian Home Minister, Mufti Mohammad Sayeed, was kidnapped but freed unharmed . New Delhi agreed to the demand for the release of five Kashmiris from detention .
 Indian government brought Jagmohan Malhotra back as governor in January 1990 . Determined to maintain occupation, he was brought back in as governor .
 Free kitchens were not allowed to distribute food to people confined to their homes . Even free kitchens were also banned from distributing food to prisoners .
 Correspondents of the foreign media were prohibited from entering Kashmir . Foreign media were not allowed to enter Kashmir .
 Unseen by the world the Indian military and para-military forces, already given special powers and immunity from prosecution, now resorted to arbitrary arrests, searches of homes, rape and looting of homes .
 Jagmohan was removed after months, less for what he did than for his embarrassing rhetoric . He was removed from the job after months of embarrassing rhetoric, less than what happened .
 His successor, Girish Saxena, added even more ruthless techniques to crush the Kashmiri uprising . His successor added more ruthless tactics to crush Kashmiris .
 Captured militants were subjected to torture until they agreed to assist the armed forces . Captured militant militants were tortured into agreeing to help the military .
 The Indian government passed the Armed Forces Special Powers Act authorizing the use of lethal force and giving immunity from prosecution . The act was passed by the Indian government in 2007 .
 Torture is reported to be routinely used during combing operations as well as in army camps, interrogation centres, police stations and prisons . Torture has been reported to have been routinely used in the past .
 Indiscriminate beatings are common and rape in particular appears to be routine in the U.S. State Department of Justice says rape is routine .
 More than any other phenomenon, these deliberate killings reveal the magnitude of the human rights crisis in Kashmir . Kashmir is a state of human rights in Kashmir, says Dr. Kashmir .
 Asia Watch and Physicians for Human Rights 1: Rape is not uncommon and there is evidence of its employment as an instrument of terror . Asia Watch: There is evidence that rape is used as a weapon of terrorism .
 Amnesty InternationaP: Serious human rights abuses, extra-judicial executions and other political killings in Jammu and Kashmir and other northern states . Torture and rape by police and other agents of Government, deaths of suspects in police custody, arbitrary arrests and in-communication detentions
 Researchers for Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch were not permitted to visit Jammu and Kashmir . Amnesty International researchers were not allowed to visit Kashmir .
 The years of armed struggle have taken a heavy toll of lives lost, about which reliable figures are impossible to obtain . U.S. State Department of State 10: "We are not sure how many lives have been lost"
 Kashmiri freedom struggle faced a new obstacle after the collapse of the Soviet Union . Economic and Political Weekly Weekly 11: 11: 10:30am . Kashmiri independence struggle faced new obstacle in Kashmir .
 An imaginary fear of Islam was built up in the West in the early 1990s . The West built up a fear of the Muslim faith in the 1990s in the hope of Islam .
 The word ‘fundamentalism’ came into sudden vogue to discredit political movements of Muslim peoples, even though their aims were freedom from alfcn occupation, respect for human rights and democracy .
 India labelled Kashmiri activists as extremists, fundamentalists and terrorists . India labelled them as extremists and fundamentalists . Kashmiris have been living in Kashmir since 1989 .
 The United States had earlier imposed sanctions on Pakistan because of alleged violation of the Pressler Law . The U.S. considered placing Pakistan on its list of terrorist states .
 To accelerate the favourable change in international opinion, Indian government adopted a new posture of seeming willingness for political accommodation .
 Kashmiri political leaders were under prolonged detention in prisons in India . It released some of the more prominent Kashmiri politicians who were under detention .
 Mirwaiz Umar Farooq elected as chairman of the Muslim Conference in 1932 . He is the grandson of Mirwan Mohammad Yusuf who founded of the conference in 1932, who founded it .
 APHC emphasised that the question of whether Kashmir should accede to Pakistan or become independent was premature . It emphasised the priority objective of ending Indian occupation .
 APHC has remained united on the common plank of self-determination . Azadi, a word that can be translated as freedom or independence, is the ultimate aim of Azadi . APHC is a group that aims to become independent in the Arab Spring .
 Most APHC leaders defended armed struggle because India had closed the political option . While not involved in militancy, most APHC members were not involved militancy .
 The apparent change in Indian policy of opening a political window did not lead to any reduction in the use of force . The change in India's use of military force has not led to a reduction in use of it, says the author .
 Kashmiri militants who, unable to withstand torture, turned into Indian agents, say Kashmiris . They were captured by Indian forces and turned into agents, says Kashmiri activist .
 Led by Mohammad Yusuf Parray alias Kuka Parray, they acted as a fifth column against their own kith and kin . The Parray family is a fifth-columnist in Pakistan .
 Kashmiri volunteers from outside IHK, and former Afghan Mujahideen and members of the Pakistan-based Lashkar-i-Tayyeba, began to enter IHK to join militants .
 Pakistan denied these accusations saying it provided only political, diplomatic and moral support . Pakistan denies these accusations and says it only provided support for the country .
 The credibility of the denial was undermined by reports that Jehadi groups in Pakistan were recruiting volunteers to join the Kashmiri struggle .
 A reputable international journal reported in 1999 that about 24,000 people have died in the decade-long insurgency . Police say the insurgency has killed 24,500 people .
 In the event, Kargil too failed to focus international attention on the need to resolve the Kashmir question . The Kashmir question has never been resolved in Kashmir .
 Instead of a pretext for India's repression, it provided India with another pretext to intensify repression . Instead of providing India with a pretext it provided another pretext for repression .
 The Indian government officially estimates 30,000 deaths in the last twelve years . The government estimates that the deaths have occurred in India alone alone .
 The deep sense of insecurity can be traced to the thousands of disappearances that have occurred over 13 years with little accountability . The deep security can be directly traced to those disappearances .
 Virtually every one in Srinagar knows someone who has been killed, arrested or tortured, and almost no one has been unaffected by the state of physical insecurity . Almost no one in the city has been spared from the violence .
 To raise the tension further, it concentrated the bulk of its armed forces on Pakistan’s borders and the Line of Control . The bulk of the armed forces are concentrated on the border and the border .
 Pakistan banned Harkat-ul-Mujahidin and Jaish-e-Mohammad in January 2002 . Pakistan condemned the attack and decided to ban the two groups in 2002 . The two groups were banned from Pakistan in January .
 Organisation of the Islamic Conference adopted strong resolutions upholding the Kashmiri right of self-determination and condemning Indian repression . Organisation adopted strong . resolutions upholding right of Kashmiri . right to self-rule .
 OIC’s attempts to obtain access to Kashmir for investigation of the grim situation were blocked by India . India blocked the OIC's attempts to get access to the region for investigation .
 Pakistan’s efforts to secure official cognisance of the plight of the Kashmiri people by the U.N. Human Rights Commission did not succeed . Pakistan's efforts to . secure official . cognisance by the United Nations Human . Rights Commission failed .
 Too many of the member states of the commission took a restrictive view of its competence . Too many member states were opposed to international prying into their own record or were disinclined to displease India, says the Commission .
 Pakistan was obliged to withdraw draft resolution it had proposed for adoption by the commission in 1994 and 1995 . Pakistan was forced to withdraw the draft resolution . Pakistan had proposed to adopt a draft resolution for adoption in 1994-1995 . Pakistan withdrew draft resolution in 1995 .
 The United States and some other governments have issued statements critical of Indian agencies for arbitrary arrests, torture and deaths in custody . The U.S. and others have criticized the Indian agencies .
 Kashmiri militants criticized for acts of a terrorist nature . But some of them also criticized Kashmiri militant acts of terrorism . Some of the militants have been killed in Kashmir .
 Pakistan, too, came under adverse notice for police excesses in Karachi, undercutting its credentials for mobilisation of support for Kashmiris . Pakistan also came under scrutiny for excesses by police in Karachi .
 Formation of new government in India following May 1996 elections raised optimism . Formation of a new government following the May 1996 election in India raised optimism. Formation of the new government raised optimism in India .
 Hurriyat Conference boycotted the election for the Indian parliament held in May, and the state elections in September 1996 . The Hurriyaat Conference was boycotting the Indian elections .
 In the past almost all elections in the occupied state had been rigged but this was the most farcical exercise in history . In the . past, almost all of the elections in . occupied state were rigged, but this is the most . ever . election in occupied state was rigged,
 Independent media reports eloquently depicted scenes of poor villagers driven at gunpoint to polling stations . Poor villagers were forced to be driven to the polling stations by armed men .
 Hurriyat leaders were placed under detention and anti-poll protest meetings were prohibited . Anti-election protests were banned in Iran . Hurriyaat leaders placed under arrest and anti poll protest meetings prohibited .
 National Conference agreed to participate in the state election on the basis of secret understandings given to Farooq Abdullah by the Deve Gowda government . National Conference has historically provided India with a political front for its annexationist aims .
 The popular boycott made it clear that elections under the Indian aegis could not be a substitute for a free and impartial plebiscite under UN auspices . The popular boycotts were made clear by the popular boycott of the elections .
 APHC said more than 80,000 Kashmiris had died at the hands of the Indian occupation forces . By 2004, the APHC claimed more than80,000 people had died .
 U.S. State Department of State, Report on Human Rights Situation in India, 30 January 1998 . Report on human rights situation in India was published in 1998 .
 Gautam Naviakha, 'Internal War and Civil Rights, Disappearances in Jammu and Kashmir', published in Mumbai's Economic and Political Weekly, 12 June 1999 . He says Jammu Kashmir has suffered from internal and external violence .
 Prominent leaden included Syed Ali Geelani of Jamaat-i-Islami, Yasin Malik of Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front, Abdul Gani Lone of the Peoples Conference, and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq of Muslim Conference .
 Statement by Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, The Hindustan Times, New Delhi, 8 June 1992 .
 Quoted in Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto’s letter of 3 June 1996 to Prime Minim Deve Gowda, The News. The News .
 The Afghan people suffered grievously in the struggle to recover freedom . Chapter 15 The Afghanistan Civil War, 1990-1998 . The Afghan Civil War was Afghanistan's first civil war .
 A million people perished and some six million had to take refuge outside their country, largely in Pakistan and Iran . Some six million people took refuge in Pakistan, Iran and Pakistan . Some of the world's worst-known pandemic was in Afghanistan .
 The economic and human infrastructure of Afghanistan was devastated on a scale with few parallels . Afghanistan's infrastructure was devastated by the destruction of the country's infrastructure . The economic, human infrastructure is devastated in Afghanistan's war-torn years .
 Already one of the least developed countries, it suffered damage to agriculture, irrigation systems, roads, transport, and educational institutions . It suffered fearful damage to its infrastructure .
 The regime the Soviets installed under Najibullah fought on for nearly three more years . The regime was overthrown by the Soviets in 1979 . The Taliban was defeated by the Soviet Union in 1980s and 1991 .
 After proxy administration collapsed in April 1992, a protracted war of succession began among the Mujahideen political parties . Political parties were founded apparently in the personal power ambitions of their leaders, but progressively exposing its ethnic basis .
 For their epic sacrifices, the Afghan people deserved a better fate than the long nightmare of internecine fighting, political disintegration and economic collapse . The Afghan people deserve a better future than their long nightmare, writes John Sutter .
 The Mujahideen started on a hopeful note of unity after Najibullahs fall . The Mujaideen has been fighting in Afghanistan since 2001 .
 At a meeting in Peshawar on 24 April 1992, the Alliance leaders reached an agreement . The Alliance leaders agreed an agreement in 1992 .
 An Islamic Council headed by Sibghatullah Mojaddedi was installed for two months . Professor Burhanuddin Rabbani was to become president for four months . An Islamic council was installed after two months after which Professor Rabbani would become president .
 Mojaddedi abided by the accord but Rabbani refused to yield power when his term expired . Rabbani's refusal to give up power led to the collapse of the country's power vacuum in 2011 .
 Pakistan worked for unity among the Afghan parties . Brokering the Peshawar accord in concert with Saudi Arabia and Iran, Pakistan worked with them .
 Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, said to be Pakistan’s favourite, did not even figure in the new power structure . He was said to have been Pakistan's favourite but did not have a role in Pakistan's new government .
 At a meeting in Islamabad on 7 March 1993, the Afghan leaders agreed on the formation of a government for a period of 18 months . Professor Rabbani continued as president and Engineer Hekmatyar became prime minister .
 Afghan leaders reconfirmed the Islamabad accord during visits to Saudi Arabia and Iran . The accord was not implemented .
 The composition of the cabinet to be ‘formed by the Prime Minister in consultation with the President’ was not agreed upon . It will be formed by Prime Minister 'in consultation with President'
 Though he was repulsed, the attractive city had largely escaped destruction during the liberation struggle, it was severely damaged as a result of the intra-Mujahideen fighting .
 A certain calm seemed to have descended over the divided country in 1995 . Although little progress was achieved toward unity, little progress has been achieved .
 Tajik-dominated Rabbani government ruled over five of the central provinces . The Taliban controlled the southern provinces . Abdur Rashid Dostum’s Uzbek Militia controlled the northern provinces .
 Mujahideen Alliance failed to establish an effective central administration . Mujahideden Alliance did not establish a central administration in the 1980s .
 The Northern Alliance received assistance from foreign countries to sustain itself in power . It did little to establidi security much less begin economic reconstruction of the ruined country . Northern Alliance was founded in 1953 .
 The absence of a national army, financial resources and administrative reach led to anarchical conditions in the country . Warlords and local commanders tried to impose personal control through intimidation and extortion .
 Pakistan’s embassy in Kabul was sacked by a government-sponsored mob in 1995 . The mob sacked the embassy in September 1995 . Pakistan's expectations of friendly relations with the Afghan government received a shock .
 One employee was killed, the ambassador and forty officials were badly injured and the building, and all official records were burnt . The ambassador was killed and the ambassador was badly injured .
 The Taliban played a significant part in the struggle against Soviet occupation but did not have any organisation and played no role in the new power structure under the Mujahideen warlords . Graduates and students of religious seminaries were students and students .
 The beginning of their rise to prominence was the result of a local incident in a southern village in 1994 . The band were formed by a group of local villagers in the southern village .
 Villagers approached the local mullah to intercede with the authorities . Outraged by the offensive social behaviour of a local commander, the villagers approached the mullah .
 Unable to provide satisfaction or intimidate the angry crowd, the commander fled . The commander fled the scene of the incident .
 Warlord commanders did not put up any resistance as the Taliban were invited by people of other provinces . Warlords were invited to Afghanistan by people in other provinces, not by warlord commanders .
 The Rabbani regime saw a foreign hand behind the popular upsurge . The Taliban is threatening the Mujahideen-controlled provinces in Afghanistan .
 Kabul accused Pakistan of supporting and assisting the Taliban with equipment and manpower . Failing to recognise that the Taliban phenomenon was the indigenous product of popular disgust at the internecine squabbling amongst the warlords, Kabul failed to recognise it was the result of public disgust .
 Pakistan had, throughout the struggle against the Soviets, sought to promote unity among the Mujahideen leaders, and after the fall of the Najibullah proxy regime, also successfully promoted consensus among them .
 The breakdown of both accords was attributable to the internecine conflict amongst the Mujahideen, with different ethnic leaders ranged against one another for domination of the country .
 The shura that ruled Jalalabad melted away and the city fell to the Taliban . The Taliban took over the city from the shura and took control of it .
 The Taliban then pushed toward the capital from the east as well as the south . The Taliban is now in control of the country's capital Kabul .
 Government forces were by now too demoralised to resist the Taliban . The government forces were in fact too disheartened to resist .
 The Rabbani regime, backed now also by Hekmatyar, abandoned the capital . Rabbani's regime has been backed by the Hekmaar regime since 2009 .
 With remarkably little bloodshed the Taliban entered Kabul on the morning of 27 September 1996 . The Taliban entered the capital in the early hours of September 27, 1996 .
 Their advance was then halted as Tajik and Uzbek warlords held the northern provinces . Their advance then halted . Tajik, Uzbek and Tajik warlords now hold the rest of the country .
 In May 1997, the situation took another dramatic turn as a result of dissension in the Uzbek ranks . The situation took a dramatic turn after a series of dissensions .
 Uzbek warlords former foreign minister, General Abul Malik, revolted and invited the Taliban forces to take over Mazar-i-Sharif . Dostum was accused of pursuing personal power at the expense of the unity of the country .
 By now Rabbani, the titular president of the country, and Hekmatyar had taken refuge in Iran, and the Taliban controlled some 90 per cent of Afghan territory . By now, Rabbani had been in Iran .
 Uzbek and Shiite forces balked at the Taliban attempt to centralise power in their hands . The Uzbek and the Shiite forces said they would not accept the Taliban's attempts to take over the country .
 Uzbek forces took the Taliban contingent prisoner on 28 May . Objecting to the order for surrender of arms, the Uzbek force took them prisoner . The Taliban contingent was taken prisoner by Uzbek forces .
 General Dostum staged a comeback, driving out General Malik who fled to Iran . General Malik was killed in 2009, but was allowed to stay in the country . General Dstum was defeated by General Malik .
 Hopes of restoration of peace and unity appeared to recede as the country became divided along geographic and ethnic fault-lines . Hopes appeared to be fading as country becomes divided along ethnic fault lines .
 The Taliban succeeded in recapturing Mazar-i-Sharif and most of the northern provinces in 1998 . The Taliban were able to recapture the city in 1998 after a decade of Taliban rule .
 Ahmad Shah Mahsud remains a key stronghold in the Panjsher Valley and areas to the north of Kabul . His artillery has launched recurrent salvos on the hapless capital, Kabul .
 The Taliban established better law and order in the territory under their control than the Afghan people had seen for two decades . Meanwhile, the Taliban established law order in their control of Afghanistan .
 The Taliban lived austerely so that taxation was light . Taliban were men of faith and integrity . Taliban ruled the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 The vast majority of the people welcomed the Taliban’s success in disarming lawless gangs, restoring peace and providing an administration that was religious, modest and uncorrupt . The Taliban's success was welcomed by the majority of people in Afghanistan .
 The Taliban lacked sophistication as well as understanding of international law and world politics . A simple and idealistic group with only religious education, the Taliban lacked sophisticated sophistication . The Taliban was an idealistic and idealist group .
 Afghan rulers groomed the capital as an island of modernity in a sea of conservative and tribal countryside . They antagonised the inhabitants of the capital, which had been groomed by the Afghan rulers . The Afghan government had been grooming the capital of Kabul as an 'island of modern
 The stringent restrictions they imposed upon women evoked denunciation, more abroad than within . Women's rights have been banned in the U.S.
 The narrow and extremist interpretation of Islam by the Taliban chief who was proclaimed head of Muslims offended even Muslim countries . Even Muslim countries felt mocked and humiliated by the parody of their great faith .
 They castigated the Talibans' archaic interpretation of Islam, especially the corporal punishments . The Talbanans castigated Islam's archaic interpretation, especially its corporal punishment .
 The Islamic Republic of Iran denounced the Taliban for providing another pretext for prejudice against Islam . The Taliban is accused of providing a pretext for prejudicing against Islam, the Islamic Republic said .
 Tehran’s reservations about the Taliban were founded in a number of factors, including the Taliban . Tehran's reservations against the Taliban have been founded in several factors, such as the Taliban's influence in the country .
 Iran had supported a composite government in Kabul with a due share for Tajiks and Hazaras . Like other neighbours of multi-ethnic and multi-sect Afghanistan, Iran supported the composite government . Pakistan hoped for the Pushtoons and the Uzbeks and the Push toons
 Largely Pushtoon and Sunni, the Taliban were perceived to discriminate against the non-Pushtoons and the Shias . The Taliban was perceived to be discriminating against those who were not Pushtoons or Sunni .
 The denial of human rights to women, their confinement and ban on employment outside homes, and closure of schools for girls earned worldwide obloquy . Women's rights were denied to include employment outside the home, employment and education .
 The entire international community denounced the demolition of the Buddha statues in Bamiyan . The Buddha statues are an archaeological heritage of world history and civilisation .
 Opinion in the West was appalled by the stringent interpretation of the Shariah laws by the Taliban . The Taliban closed schools for girls and banned employment for women outside their homes in Kabul .
 Efforts by the UN special envoy, Herbert Holl, to promote intra-Afghan dialogue made little progress . Efforts to promote a dialogue between the Taliban and the Taliban failed to reach an agreement .
 All neighbours of Afghanistan had a common interest in an end to the civil war, writes John Defterios . He says a broad-based government in Kabul would ensure the safety of different ethnic and sectarian segments of the population .
 Peace and unity, moreover, would facilitate transit and trade, as well as the construction of oil and gas pipelines, to the benefit of all countries of the region, especially land-locked Afghanistan, which would earn substantial amounts in transit fees .
 Despite the manifest long-term advantages of peace in Afghanistan, the neighbours seemed stuck in a miasma of rivalries and suspicions .
 Foreign military assistance to the warring Afghan parties ‘continued unabated throughout 1997,’ according to the UN Secretary General . Foreign military aid to the Afghan parties continued unabated through 1997 .
 The 'foreign providers' were said to be engaged in this new ‘Great Game’ with high stakes in the competition for access to the rich petroleum and gas resources of the Caspian basin . The ‘foreign providers’ were said .
 A less Machiavellian explanation could be found in the context of the identical desire of all the neighbours of Afghanistan to save themselves from a further spillover of the Afghan civil war .
 Taliban invited hostility by their policy of welcoming foreign Muslims, and providing them with military training and arms . Isolated internationally because of their extremist interpretation of Islam .
 Arab and Central Asian states, as well as Russia, asked Pakistan to detain and extradite their nationals who engaged in subversive activities, abusing residence or transit facilities in Pakistan . Russia, Arab, Central Asian and Russian states, among others, have asked Pakistan for detention and extradition .
 Islamabad was reluctant to intervene in the autonomous tribal areas on its border with Afghanistan . Islamabad was not dismissive of the concerns but was reluctant in the region .
 Many foreign militants had come to Pakistan to join the jihad against the Soviet forces in Afghanistan . Many of the foreign militants came to Pakistan in order to fight Soviet forces .
 They are experts at forging documents and changing addresses, they say . Having developed contacts in the areas along the border, they are difficult to find . They are known to forge documents and change addresses .
 Algeria and Uzbekistan particularly, made strong protests . Algeria, Uzbekistan and Algeria made strong and repeated protests . Uzbekistan made strong, repeated protests against the government .
 The Taliban failed to see the writing on the wall and grossly misjudged their capacity to resist . The Taliban should not have been underestimated, the Taliban said. The Taliban will not be surprised if they are successful in Afghanistan .
 Security Council Resolution 1189 of 1998 condemning terrorist attacks on U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania . Resolution called on all states to take effective steps for the prevention of terrorist attacks and prosecution of culprits .
 Security Council Resolution 1267 of 15 October 1999 demanded that the Taliban turn over bin Laden to justice . Resolution also imposed sanctions on the Afghan airline after the attack on USS Cole .
 The Taliban ignored the demands in repeated resolutions of the Security Council under Chapter VII . They merely went on reiterating their demand for evidence, which was implicitly considered sufficient by the Council . The Taliban ignore the demands .
 A more sinister legacy of the Afghan crisis for Pakistan was the spillover of extremism and weapons from Afghanistan to which was soon added the influx of narcotics . Pakistan has seen a rise in extremism, weapons and narcotics since the Afghan conflict .
 Dacoits and sectarian extremists now have more lethal weapons than the police, police say . Police now have lethal weapons more than they have ever had before, says police chief .
 Hundreds of foreign citizens who came to join the jihad stayed behind in Pakistan . Some of them indulged in acts of terrorism, some of them were terrorists .
 The bombing of the Egyptian embassy in December 1995 was attributed to them . The bombing was the first of the attacks on Egyptian embassies in Pakistan in 1995 .
 Also, agents of the Rabbani regime in Kabul perpetrated acts of sabotage in Pakistan, says Ravija . Also, they say, they have also perpetrated attacks on Pakistan .
 A car-bomb explosion in a Peshawar bazaar killed over forty and wounded a hundred innocent people in December 1995 . A car bomb explosion in the bazaar in Peshawar killed over 40 and wounded over 100 innocent people . In December 1995, a car bomb exploded in the Peshawar
 The glorification of the Mujahideen, however sincere on the part of many in Pakistan, and expedient and cynical on that of the United States with its sole aim of defeating the Soviets, proved equally shortsighted and damaging .
 In Pakistan it encouraged exploitation of religion for the narrow ends of the regime . It skewed and vitiated the balance against the modernist vision of its founding father . In Pakistan, it encourages exploitation of religious beliefs .
 It sowed seeds that later sprouted extremism and militancy that were to become a nightmare for both countries . The seeds were planted in Afghanistan and Afghanistan .
 The Russian people were rightly critical of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan as ’a great mistake’ The Russian invasion was rightly critical .
 They generally approved of President Zia’s policy of support for the Afghans . The Afghan people were generally pleased with the support of Zia's government .
 Few foresaw the consequences of involvement in the conflict, and the grave problems that would emerge in the wake of the conflict . The conflict is still raging in Iraq and Syria .
 Western supporters of the Afghan struggle had themselves to blame for walking away . But they had to pay a high price some years later . Western supporters were rightly critical of Afghan warring parties .
 In retrospect the answer is easy to give but, alas, humans are not gifted with prescience . Policies have to be devised and judged in context of the time and contemporary knowledge .
 Islamabad’s sense of alarm in 1979 was not a figment of its imagination . Given the history of Soviet expansionism, Islamabad was alarmed in 1979 . Islamabad was worried about the threat posed by the Soviet Union .
 Pakistan was neither in a position to challenge the Soviet super-power nor could it ignore the intervention without peril to its security . Pakistan was not in a place to challenge Russia nor to ignore its intervention without a risk .
 An alternative to the middle course it pursued seems difficult to conceive even in retrospect . An alternative would have been possible, but it's difficult to imagine .
 Success and failure can be a measure of policies, but human struggle cannot be appraised in isolation from the nobility of the cause . Success, failure and failure are measures of success and failure, but success and success can be measures of policies .
 The Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was morally and legally wrong . The Afghan resistance was right to resist the Soviet intervention . The U.S. was wrong to intervene in Afghanistan .
 Pakistan’s decision in favour of solidarity with the fraternal people of Afghanistan was morally right and based on enlightened selfinterest . Pakistan's decision to support Afghan people was moral right and enlightened self-interest, writes Ahmed Shah .
 These problems, as well as malfeasance and venality in transactions between the Mujahideen and their friends, surfaced during the struggle in Afghanistan . These problems surfaced in the struggle against the Taliban .
 Priorities and vested interests did not permit timely remedies, however . Priorities, however, prevented timely remedies .
 Geneva negotiations had only the limited aim of getting the Soviets to withdraw from Afghanistan . The Geneva talks were meant to get the Soviets out of Afghanistan, writes Andrew Hammond .
 All the parties agreed that the formation of a government was an entirely internal affair of Afghanistan . The Afghans alone had the right to decide this matter to the exclusion of the Soviet Union, Pakistan or any other country . The Afghan government was formed by Afghans alone, the Afghan parliamentarians .
 The United Nations was understandably reluctant to undertake this task . The U.N. has been reluctant to take part in the task .
 Until the end of the Cold War it avoided assumption of a role for the promotion of reconciliation or consensus in any embattled country . Until end of Cold War, it avoided assuming of a . role for reconciliation or . reconciliation in any country .
 Moscow and Kabul were at first dismissive of any suggestion for a role for the Mujahideen in the government of Afghanistan except on Kabul's terms . Kabul and Moscow were initially dismissive of the suggestion .
 Pakistan as well as other friends and supporters backed the Mujahideen position . Pakistan and other friends of the Mujaideen supported the Taliban's position .
 President Zia alone changed his view for reasons that remain obscure . Zia's unjustified and unlawful dismissal of Prime Minister Junejo in May 1988 provides circumstantial evidence of a personal power motivation .
 In the event, even he was unable to persuade the Mujahideen to meet with Diego Cordovez in pursuit of his mission of promoting a government of unity in Afghanistan .
 It was probably too much to expect the Mujahideen leaders to reach accommodation with the surrogate regime after the Soviets withdrew . A government of unity could have saved the country from fragmentation .
 More tragic was the rivalry for personal power among the Mujahideen leaders that prolonged the nightmare for the Afghan people . The Afghan people were killed by the Taliban in 2001 .
 As a result of the anarchy, the Mujahideen themselves were sidelined by new forces in the country . Also, as a result, the Mujahideen were sidelined .
 Taliban exclusivism, excess of religious zeal and permission for foreign adventurer to abuse hospitality sealed their fate . Likewise, the Taliban exclusivity, excess . and permission . for foreign . adventurers to use hospitality sealed them fate .
 Pakistan's interest, as indeed that of other neighbours, lay above all in an end to the civil war and restoration of Afghanistan’s unity, which were highly desirable objectives also for the Afghan people themselves . Pakistan”s interest as well as that of others in Afghanistan lay in
 Only peace in Afghanistan could relieve Pakistan and Iran of the burden of Afghan refugees . Peace in Afghanistan would relieve Pakistani and Iranian refugees . Only peace could relieve the burden on the two countries .
 Over two million of them still remain in Pakistan, suffering themselves and burdening Pakistan’s economy . Over 2 million of those who have died in Pakistan still live in Pakistan .
 Peace was a prerequisite, moreover, for the opening of transit facilities without which cooperation with the Central Asian Republics remained blocked . Peace was also a prerequisite for opening transit facilities in the region .
 What is obvious in retrospect is the futility of a king-maker role in Afghanistan on the part of any outsider . The Afghan government has been in the country since 2001 .
 Like imperial Britain in the nineteenth century, the Soviet super-power failed in its attempt to impose a surrogate government on the Afghans . The Afghan government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in Afghanistan .
 Pakistan lacked the power and resources to persuade the Taliban to rectify their fatal policies . Pakistan lacks the power to persuade them to change their policies, say experts .
 The U.S. and the West would have had a better chance to influence the Afghans, the author says . The United States and West, with their vastly greater resources, would have been able to influence Afghans, he says .
 By blaming Islamabad, Washington covered up its own error in walking away from Afghanistan after achieving its Cold War aim . Washington imposed sanctions on Pakistan to further undermine its capacity to play a significant role in Afghanistan .
 Not until after 9/11 did the U.S. rectify its blunder—though at much greater cost . The United States rectified the blunder at the time .
 'Afghanistan and bin Laden' is quoted in Dawn, Islamabad, 19 November 2004 . Afghanistan and Bin Laden were first mentioned in the book 'Al Qaeda in Afghanistan'
 Mullah Mohammad Omar, Taliban leader, quoted by Rahimullah Yusufzai in The Sews in 1996 .
 Uzbekistan President Islam Karimov, speaking at the OIC Summit in Ashkabat on 14 May 1997, reported in The News .
 Arif. op. cit., 327, quoting Eduard Shevardnadze’s statement in Izvestia of 19 February 1989 . Arif . op.cit., 327 . quoting Eduardo Shevardanadze's statement .
 Despite the pledge in the Shimla Agreement to settle differences by peaceful means, little progress was made towards that objective after 1972 . The Shimla agreement was made in 1972 .
 Sir Creek is the western terminus of the Pakistan-India boundary in the Rann of Kutch . The demarcation of the line in Sir Creek has remained unresolved since 1969 .
 India claimed first that Sir Creek was on the Indian side, and then that the boundary should run in the middle of the creek because it was a navigable channel . Later, with an eye on the maritime resources, India claimed that Sir creek was on Indian side . India then claimed that
 Indian stance aimed to substantially reduce the area of Pakistan’s economic zone . The changed Indian stance is aimed at substantially reducing the area . Pakistan's economic zone is the largest economic zone in the world .
 India said it first wanted to complete an air survey of the area . Pakistan sought negotiations to resolve the difference, but India wanted a survey . India says it wants to complete a survey of an area .
 Surveyors general of the two countries met in May 1989 but could not reach agreement . India and India no longer accepted the 1914 resolution map, considered authentic during the proceedings of the tribunal .
 In 2003, India shot down an unarmed Pakistani aircraft in the area, killing all its crew and passengers . The incident occurred in 2003, when the Pakistani aircraft was shot down by India .
 Siachen Glacier traverses part of Baltistan in the Northern Areas, whose inhabitants threw off the Maharaja of Kashmirs yoke in 1947 .
 The area was so difficult to access and so inhospitable that no fighting took place in any of the three wars between the two countries . The area is now home to the largest population in the world, but no fighting was fought there .
 An agreement was reached on 27 July 1949 at a meeting of the military representatives of the two countries, under the auspices of the UN Commission for India and Pakistan, on the ceasefire line .
 When delineated on the map, the line terminated at point NJ 9842, some sixty miles south of the Karakorum watershed . The line was located in New Jersey, New Jersey .
 Pakistan exercised control in the glaciated area up to the Karakorum Pass . Pakistan exercises control of the area in a glacier-covered area .
 The provisional boundary between the Xinjiang region of China and the Northern Areas of the disputed state of Jammu and Kashmir under Pakistan’s control started from the tri-junction with Afghanistan in the west to the Karakorum Pass in east .
 India's protest against the agreement claiming that Kashmir was part of its territory, stated that the portion west of the Karakorum Pass was ‘under Pakistan’s unlawful occupation’ implicitly conceding that the pass was under Pakistan's control . India claimed the portion of Kashmir was
 Pakistan permits granted to mountain climbing expeditions were available in the country . Other evidence of Pakistan’s control over the region was also available in permits granted by the Pakistan government .
 After 1965, the two countries agreed to revert to status quo ante . During the 1971 war there was no change of control over territory ir the region . The two countries were at odds over territory .
 The terminus of the line of control resulting from the ceasefire of 17 December 1971 remained the same as that of the 194* ceasefire line .
 2 brigade-strength force was sent by India in 1984 to occupy a part of the glaciated area . In violation of the explicit provision in the Shimla Agreement prohibiting any attempt to ‘unilaterally alter the situation,’ 2 a brigade strength force was deployed to occupy the area
 Pakistan also dispatched a contingent, which forestalled further Indian advance . Apart from protesting against the Indian incursion, Pakistan sent a contingent of troops . Pakistan dispatched the contingent to prevent further Indian incursions .
 Ever since, the forces of the two countries have fought intermittent duels, losing even more men to frostbite in the highest battlefield in the world .
 Benazir Bhutto and Rajiv Gandhi approved the agreement at their meeting in Islamabad in July 1989 . The agreement has not been implemented .
 New issues were raised asking for ‘authentication’ of the existing positions, drawing a line of control in the ‘zone of conflict’ and demanding the right to establish a ‘civil post’ even though it did not have one prior to 1984, unlike Pakistan
 Indus Waters Treaty of 1960 allows construction of run-ofthe-river power plants but forbids the construction of dams on the western rivers in excess of prescribed limits . Salal, Wullar, Baglihar, and Kishenganga Projects are among the projects .
 India is obliged by the treaty to provide relevant data to Pakistan . Whenever India plans projects that interfere with the flow of the rivers, it is obliged to provide the data . Pakistan is not alone in the region of India .
 Pakistan is entitled to raise the issue in the permanent Indus Commission . If the magnitude of the dam is considered by Pakistan to violate the treaty provisions, Pakistan can raise issue . Pakistan has a right to raise issue in Indus commission .
 If the commission fails to reach agreement, either side can refer the question to consideration at the level of governments . If the question is not resolved, the question will be referred to the level-level of governments, the commission says .
 The first question arose in the 1970s when India decided to build a dam on the Chenab River at Salal . India's first dam was built on the river in Salal in the 1960s . The dam is expected to be completed by 2020 .
 After the Indus Commission failed to settle the issue, it was taken up at the level of governments of the two countries . The issue has been taken up by the governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan .
 India agreed to reduce the height of the dam so as to relieve Pakistan’s concerns regarding interference in the flow of the river . India then agreed that the dam would be reduced to less than one metre .
 The Indian government embarked on the construction of a barrage on the Jhelun River at the mouth of the Wullar Lake in the early 1980s . It envisaged the creation of storage of the lake .
 Pakistan raised the issue in the commission in 1985 where no progreis was made . Pakistan found it thirty-three times in excess of the prescribed limit, Pakistan raised it in 1985 .
 In 1987, Pakistan asked India to discontinue construction pending resolution of the question . Pakistan has asked India not to build the site in 1987 .
 Pakistan declined to take part in any discussion that would tinker with tie provisions of the treaty, its sanctity being too vital for Pakistan . Pakistan asked India to first acknowledge that the project was inconsistent with the treaty . Pakistan refused to enter into a controversy .
 India offered to change the design and operating procedures to eliminate any harmful effects on Pakistan . India was unwilling to do so but offered, in 1989, to change it to eliminate harmful effects .
 India suspended implementation of the project because of the uprising in Kashmir . No agreement was reached however, despite numerals meetings at the level of the commission and government .
 India decided to build a hydroelectric power project on the Chenab River with a dam it Baglihar upstream from the Salal dam . Meanwhile, still another dispute arose when India built a dam upstream from Salal Dam .
 The reservoir was far in exceis of the prescribed limit, and would enable India to manipulate the flosv of the river in a way that would lead to either complete stoppage far up to twenty-eight days during the critical wheat growing period .
 At first India did not provide the requisite data about tke project in advance and then delayed a visit by the Pakistani experts to the site, as required under the treaty . At first it was delayed by India not providing the data in advance .
 Inda maintained the design of the dam did not violate the treaty . Negotiations at the level of Indis Commissioners from 2001 to 2004 proved infiructuous .
 Pakistan then referred the matter to the World Bank, invoking the treaty provision for appointment of a neutral expert . Pakistan then decided to refer the matter . The World Bank has agreed to appoint an expert on the issue .
 His verdict of 12 February 2007 upheld three of the four Pakistani objections . His verdict was upheld by the Pakistani government .
 The height of the dam was reduced by 1.m. and size of pondage by 14 per cent . As a result of the reduction, the size of the pondage was also reduced . The height was reduced to 1m .
 Pakistan objected to India's plan to build power project on Kishenganaga tributary of the Jhelum River . Pakistan objected on the ground that diversion of the stream would violate the Indus Waters Treaty .
 India proposed the reopening also of the consular offices of the two countries in 1976 . India offered to lease Jinnah House in Mumbai for the Pakistan consulate .
 India sought permission to open its consulate in advance . Jinnah's house was on lease to the British deputy high commission . It was owned by Jinnah until it was taken over by the Indian government .
 Pakistan to rue its acceptance of an Indian undertaking on trust on trust . Not for the first time was Pakistan to have accepted the trust of India .
 The Pakistan Embassy in New Delhi sought permission of the Indian government for the purchase of a plot of land for the construction of the consular office in Mumbai . Meanwhile, in August 1980, the Pakistan Embassy sought the permission for the land purchase for the building of the office .
 The Indian consulate in Karachi continued to function even though it was known to the Pakistani authorities that the bulk of its personnel did not belong to the commerce and external affairs ministries of India . The bulk of the personnel at the Indian consulate were not members of the Indian government .
 Pakistan ordered closure of Indian consulate in December 1994 . Pakistan found evidence of subversive activities by Indian personnel . Pakistan was obliged to order closure of the consulate .
 Diplomats of the two countries agreed in 1992 on a bilateral code of conduct’ for the treatment of the personnel of the missions . Diplomats from the U.S. and South Korea agreed to the code in 1992 . The two countries have been in contact since then .
 This was a superfluous exercise in view of the fact that their privileges and immunities are spelled out in international conventions on diplomatic and consular relations . This was the case of the British ambassador to the Netherlands .
 The problem was not the lack of norms but of the political will to observe international law . The problem is not a lack of norm but of political will, says the BBC's Simon Tisdall .
 Pakistani and Indian governments have repeatedly accused each other of using their diplomatic staff for activities incompatible with their legitimate functions . Pakistan and India have been accused of using each other's diplomatic staff to carry out their diplomatic functions .
 The authorities have been accused of violating immunities and even resorting to violence against the staff . Apart from vigilance, which is the right of the hosl government, the authorities have also been accused .
 Instead of contributing to the furtherance of normal relations between the two countries, the consular missions added to bitterness . Whatever the merits of these allegations, it was obvious that instead of . contributing to . furtherance . relations, it is obvious that . instead of contributing . to furtherance
 In April 2005, the two countries agreed to reopen their consular missions . Hoping for a new chapter, they agreed in 2005 to reopen the missions .
 President Musharraf was reported to have said that India had agreed to lease Jinnah House to Pakistan . Pakistanis are believed to have been able to purchase the house from India .
 Pakistan received intelligence reports from 1983-85 that India was preparing an air attack on its uranium enrichment plant at Kahuta . Pakistan received a number of intelligence reports that India planned to attack the plant in 1984-85 .
 Islamabad received information from a friendly country in 1984 alerting it to the imminence of an Indian attack . Islamabad received the information from the friendly country ir 1984 . Islamabad was alerted to the threat of an attack in 1984 .
 Washington checked the report with Tel Aviv and informed Islamabad that it was false . Washington then informed Islamabad the report had been false .
 Islamabad took the precaution of informing New Delhi through friendly intermediaries that any such attack would be treated as an act of aggression . As for India, Islamabad informed New Delhi via friendly intermediary . New Delhi was warned any such an attack on Pakistan would be seen as 'aggressive'
 Concerns subsided after Pakistan and India agreed informally in December 1985 to refrain from attack on each other’s nuclear installations . Concerns on this account subsided . Pakistan, India agreed in 1985 that they would not attack each other's nuclear installations.
 According to Krishnaswamy Sundarji, the exercise was comparable in scale to the biggest exercises by NATO or the Warsaw Pact . The exercise was compared to NATO's biggest exercises or Warsaw Pact exercises .
 A quarter of a million troops, nine army divisions, five independent armoured brigades, and 1,300 tanks were envisaged in western Rajasthan . It envisaged a piercing strike into Pakistan to cut off northern Pakistan from the southern part of Pakistan .
 Specific requests to this effect by the Pakistani GHQ on the ‘hot line’ and by diplomats in New Delhi were rebuffed . Specific requests were made by Pakistan GHQ and diplomats in India .
 Concerned about the situation, Mohammad Khan Junejo took up the matter with Rajiv Gandhi in their meeting during the SAARC summit in Bangalore in 1986 .
 He was given to understand that the exercise would be scaled down, which was, however, not done, he said . He said the exercise was scaled down but not done .
 As a precaution, Pakistan army extended its own winter exercises as a precaution . The Pakistan army moved some of the formations to forward areas north of the Sutlej river .
 Sikh people had been up in arms since the Indian array’s assault on the Golden Temple, their most sacred shrine, in 1984 . They perceived the Pakistani force dispositions as a pincer posture menacing the security of the troubled state of Punjab .
 Pakistan pointed out that India should first remove the cause of the Pakistan reaction . Pakistan said India should remove the first step of removing Pakistan reaction from Pakistan .
 The defence committee of the Pakistan cabinet held an emergency meeting on 20 January . The committee, headed by the prime minister, met frequently during the crisis . The meeting was held at the end of January .
 The crisis was not of Pakistan's creation, it was decided not to stand on ceremony and instead take the initiative to try defusing the dangerous situation .
 Prime Minister Junejo telephoned Rajiv Gandhi and suggested immediate talks, at the level of foreign secretaries, to discuss mutual withdrawal of forces .
 Pakistani delegation arrived in New Delhi on 31 January . Agreement was signed on 4 February, providing for deactivation of forward air bases and disengagement .
 The storm, which had been brewing over several months, passed over within days . The storm was brewing for several months before the storm .
 The Brasstacks crisis brought Pakistan and India closer to the brink of war than any other crisis since 1971 . Subsequent studies and research have shown that the Brasstacked crisis brought the two countries closer to war .
 ‘mammoth war games’ 11 planned by an ambitious Indian army chief . Its basic and direct cause was, of course, the 'mammoths war games' 11 .
 Three wars, chronic tensions rooted in unresolved disputes, inadequate or unreliable intelligence and deep-rooted mutual suspicions fuelled worst-case assumptions .
 Some Indian planners hoped for the crisis to spiral into actual confrontation and conflict, giving them an opportunity to exploit the disparity of forces . Besides the crisis, some Indian planners wanted it to become a real confrontation, they said .
 Another crisis-prevention agreement in 1991 required advance communication about aircraft flying in proximity to the other side’s airspace . The agreement was reached in 1991 .
 Britain’s partisan role in the 1971 crisis was disappointing for Pakistan . Re-entry to the Commonwealth was a disappointment for the country .
 The British failure to censure Indian military intervention was reflective of an expedient and unprincipled policy . If media criticism of the excesses committed by Pakistani authorities was understandable on humanitarian grounds, it was understandable .
 London did not even allow a decent interval to lapse before it decided to extend recognition to Bangladesh . Western Europe, Australia and New Zealand all agreed to do so simultaneously .
 A quick analysis revealed that the pullout would not entail any great loss except inconvenience to Pakistani settlers in Britain . The pullout of Pakistanis would not be a great loss only inconvenience to British settlers in the UK .
 National pride would be served by giving a counter-punch to Britain, which looked at the Commonwealth as a source of comfort in its time of decline from a ranking world power status .
 President Zia made the decision to rejoin the Commonwealth at the suggestion of visiting British leaders, subject to the condition that re-entry was arranged in an honourable way . Zia's decision to quit the Commonwealth was largely Bhuttos' decision .
 For several years Indira Gandhi frustrated the proposal . The proposal was rejected by the Prime Minister of India . The government has been unable to come up with the idea .
 She vetoed Pakistan’s return at the Melbourne summit In 1900 . Despite pleadings by the Australian prime minister, she vetoed Pakistan's return .
 The decision surprised even the Indian foreign secretary who had earlier told the Pakistani ambassador that India would not stand in the way . Her decision was also quite personal, and surprised even even India's foreign secretary .
 Rajiv Gandhi justified opposition to Pakistan’s return to the Commonwealth on the ground that Pakistan was ruled by a dictator . Rajiv followed his mother's line, justifying the opposition to the return to Pakistan .
 democratic rule was not a precondition for membership at that time, he says . Democracy was not necessary for membership, he adds . He says. "Democracy is not a prerequisite for membership"
 In any case, India did not abandon its opposition even after elections in 1985, the installation of a civilian government and an end to martial law . The opposition was not abandoned even after the end of martial law in 1985 .
 Senior military officials in India have reportedly recommended air strikes on targets in Pakistan . The situation in Kashmir has continued to deteriorate as the situation continues .
 The reports triggered anxiety among analysts that Indian adventurism could precipitate war between the two countries which could escalate to the nuclear level . Whether their object was to deter Pakistan or intimidate the Kashmiris, the reports triggered an anxiety .
 Robert Gates sent Robert Gates, assistant for the National Security Council, to Islamabad and New Delhi in May 1990 . In May 1990, the President of the U.S. sent Gates to Pakistan and India .
 Although sensational reports'* depicting an actual nuclear threat were discounted, the U.S. obviously possessed enough information to consider it necessary to launch an exercise in preventive diplomacy .
 Pakistan welcomed the Chemical Weapons Convention when It was concluded in 1993 . Pakistan has been supportive of resolutions in the UN General Assembly for general disarmament .
 As a country that never had a chemical weapons programme, it was satisfied with the CWC s prohibition on production or acquisition of such weapons and the obligation to destroy existing stocks within ten years . The CWC has been banned from producing or acquiring such weapons .
 Pakistan did not ratify the CWC until four years later, in October 1997, because of its concern over a provision in the convention regarding verification and inspection . Pakistan has not ratified the convention since 1997 .
 This was unprecedented in its broad scope, giving rise to the apprehension that it might be exploited for intrusion into the country’s sensitive nuclear facilities . It was also feared that the government might be using it as a tool to hack into sensitive facilities .
 India's ratification of CWC relieved Pakistan’s concerns about the use of such weapons against its security, especially because verification provisions make this convention reliable . Pakistan would not undertake asymmetrical obligations in respect of disarmament .
 The importance of this factor was illustrated by India’s obligatory disclosure pursuant to CWC that it had actually produced chemical weapons, in violation of a bilateral agreement with Pakistan, signed in April 1992, prohibiting chemical weapons .
 The revelation that India did not actually observe that commitment could not but further undermine the credibility of India’s pledges in a bilateral framework . The revelation could further undermine that commitment, it said .
 The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty was conceived in the context of non-proliferation . It was conceived as a test ban on nuclear weapons . The treaty was intended to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation .
 Its object was to restrict qualitative improvement of weapons technology by the existing, as well as aspiring, nuclear weapons states . The aim of the project was to limit the development of nuclear weapons technology .
 This stance was consistent with its long-standing policy of joining the vast majority of nations that supported limitation, reduction and elimination of weapons of mass destruction .
 Pakistan’s preoccupation with security in South Asia, its one and only condition was that such measures should be non-discriminatory . Pakistan has a long-standing commitment to security in the region, but its only condition is that it is not discriminatory .
 Pakistan sought to ensure, during negotiations in the UN conference on disarmament, to plug any loopholes India might later exploit to change its mind . Pakistan sought, during . negotiations, to ensure that any loopholes were not exploited .
 Pakistan successfully sponsored a provision which made CTBT’s entry into force contingent on ratification by each and every one of the forty-four nuclear-capable states . CTBT is now entering into force .
 If any state later renounced the treaty, that would also entitle other states to review their position . Moreover, if any such state renounced it, it would also be able to review its position .
 It became evident that the real purpose behind the idealistic facade was to retain the option to conduct nuclear tests . The real purpose of the regime was to keep the option of conducting nuclear tests.
 The United States Senate decided against ratification of the treaty in 1997 . Even the slight hope that India might be persuaded by the United States to change its stance vanished when the U.S. Senate voted against ratification .
 Some 18 in the government felt that Pakistan had little to lose and much to gain by signing the treaty . The distinction between signing and ratification, and the provision in the CTBT text regarding its entry into force, is not mentioned in the text .
 Treaty would not enter into force anyway because of Indian and U.S. refusal to become parties . It would cost nothing because of the treaty's failure to enter force anyway . Treaty would have cost nothing .
 By signing it, Pakistan, it could reap considerable benefits, it was argued . Pakistan could also benefit from the agreement, the government argued .
 It would deflect and sidetrack international pressures, occupy high moral ground, earn praise and earn praise for itself, and isolate and expose India . India would deflect international pressures and occupy moral ground with its actions .
 Pakistan could free-ride known Indian recalcitrance, keep the cake and eat it too . In brief, Pakistan could be free-ruling known Indian reactions and eat it .
 The arguments were too technical and arcane for lay opinion to grasp . The only problem was that the arguments were not easy to grasp for lay people .
 Some of the political parties opposed to the military government sensed an opportunity to exploit the situation by denouncing any unilateral signing . Some political parties oppose the government's military government .
 A religious party warned of mass agitation if the government wavered in its resolve . The government has vowed not to withdraw its support for the government .
 The government had never formally approved the suggestion to sign the CTBT anyway . The government did not pursue the idea anyway .
 Although the idea had to be abandoned, its public discussion yielded some benefits . The idea had been abandoned, but the public discussion was productive .
 Foreign governments noted that a section of enlightened opinion in Pakistan favoured a reasoned and rational approach to nuclear issues . Foreign governments, especially those of )apan and some EU countries, noted that .
 The debate also helped soften the impression of a trigger-happy people, generated by popular celebrations in Pakistan after nuclear tests .
 The Fissile Material Cut off Convention was proposed in the 1980s with the object of limiting nuclear weapon capabilities by freezing the production of enriched uranium and plutonium . The convention was designed to limit nuclear weapon production by freezing production .
 FMCT would reduce the dangers inherent in the increasing numbers of nuclear weapons in the arsenals of nuclear states . Combined with the CTBT, which would restrict qualitative improvement of nuclear arms, FMCT could reduce the danger inherent in nuclear weapons .
 Members of the Conference on Disarmament are reluctant to embark on another similar endeavour . Since all of the enormous effort invested in negotiating that treaty has gone to waste, they are understandably reluctant to engage in another such endeavour .
 Smaller nuclear-weapons states can now argue that efforts aimed at wider arms limitation should await the reduction of strategic weapons by the two powers with the largest arsenals . Smaller states can argue even more forcefully .
 The U.S. and Russia have entered into bilateral agreements to reduce the numbers of nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles in their arsenals . Meanwhile, the United States and Russia are working on reducing the number of nuclear warheads .
 From 35,000 or more nuclear bombs in possession of each, they have already reduced the stockpiles to 6,000 . They are currently engaged in further reductions to 1,500 bombs .
 There was an agreement by both sides to work toward a comprehensive settlement based on re-deployment of force to reduce the chances of conflict, avoidance of the use of force and avoidance of force .
 For settlement procedure, see section on Indus Waters Treaty, 1960, in Chapter 7 . For settlement procedures, see . Indus waters Treaty, 60, in 1960, for settlement .
 Statements by P V, Narasimha Rao in parliament on 1 September' 1980, and again on 25 March 1982 .
 Study by Pervaiz Iqbal Cheema, Stephen P Cohen, Sumit Ganguly, and Stephen P. Cohen, was a joint study .
 Statement by foreign minister of Pakistan, Dawn, Karachi, 26 February 1998 . Pakistan's foreign minister was assassinated in 1998 .
 Then foreign minister, the author was the main proponent of the suggestion . The author was then foreign minister .
 India conducted multiple nuclear explosion tests on 11 and 13 May 1998 . Chapter 17 Nuclear Tests India conducted . Multiple nuclear explosions were conducted .
 Pakistan, having refrained from testing for over a decade, was suddenly confronted with this surprise development . Pakistan has not tested in the past 10 years . Pakistan is the only country in the world to allow testing in Pakistan .
 The popular impulse to test was strong, but the government was impaled on the horns of a dilemma . The government has been impaled in a dilemma over the decision to test .
 To test would entail the threat of economic sanctions, which the country could ill-afford as its international solvency was precarious due to improvident policies and poor fiscal management in the 1990s . The country has a massive debt mountain of $38 billion .
 The United States had discontinued economic assistance since 1990 . If Pakistan conducted a test also lapan and other major donors including international financial institutions, would be likely to impose sanctions so that Pakistan would face threat of default .
 Pakistan had to demonstrate that it, too, possessed weapons capability . Pakistan had demonstrated that it had weapons capability. Pakistan had been denied access to weapons by Washington .
 Past experience underlined apprehensions that India might again exploit the power imbalance in order to blackmail and browbeat Pakistan .
 The rumblings of threats and bluster from across the border drowned whatever reservations existed . "Rumblings" and "bluster" from the border drown whatever reservations there existed .
 Indian home minister Lai Krishna Advani warned that Pakistan should realise that the Indian nuclear tests had changed the strategic balance . Advani is next in power and influence in the ruling BJP to the prime minister .
 He demanded that Pakistan roll back what he described as its anti-India policy . Pakistan has been accused of harbouring terrorists in Kashmir .
 The West targeted Pakistan by a policy of denial and discrimination in an attempt to prevent it from acquiring nuclear capability . It was recalled that after the 1974 Indian test, the West .
 Western states focused efforts to prevent Pakistan from following suit in 1998 . Western nations focused efforts on preventing Pakistan following suit . Pakistan was the first country to follow suit in Pakistan .
 Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott arrived in Islamabad, bringing a lot of sticks and few carrots . Talbott's visit comes with a few carrots and a few sticks, the press reported .
 President Clinton made several phone calls to Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, expreising understanding of Pakistan’s concerns . President Clinton promised to review United States sanctions and resume economic assistance .
 Pakistan is missing from the one component most important to Pakistan, namely assurance on the key issue of security . The dialogue was conspicuously missing from Pakistan, which is seeking assurances on security .
 Pakistan had to fend for its own defence . It became manifest once again that Pakistan must fend for itself . Pakistan has been in the grip of the Taliban for years .
 Almost all political parties, political leaders and security analysts, newspaper editors and columnists, the security establishment and public opinion became vociferous in demanding a response to the Indian tests . Pakistan too possessed the bomb, they say .
 Pakistani scientists conducted nuclear explosion tests in a sealed tunnel in the Chaghi Mountain in Balochistan in 1998 .
 Pakistan’s sole motivation for the response to Indian tests was security, which was, in fact, the rationale for its pursuit of the nuclear option . Pakistan's sole motivation is security, and the rationale was security .
 Pakistan voted for that treaty in 1969 and might have signed it, had it included reliable security guarantees . The treaty was signed by Pakistan in 1969, but it has never been signed .
 Pakistan voted for the CTBT in 1996 and was willing to sign it, provided India also did so . Similarly, Pakistan voted in 1996 to sign CTBT, provided it was signed by India .
 In contrast, India’s policy and pronouncements as to its nuclear stance were opaque, contradictory and misleading, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says India's nuclear stance was opaque and misleading .
 Its diplomatic stance of denunciation of discrimination in the NPT and its demand for time-bound elimination of nuclear arsenals was a smokescreen to camouflage its own nuclear ambitions . The U.S. is seeking to eliminate all nuclear weapons arsenals from the world .
 The motivation behind India’s pursuit of nuclear weapons is traceable to its ambition to project its influence and power beyond its boundaries and impose domination over less powerful neighbours .
 Having tested the bomb in 1974, the Congress government did not carry out another test, realising perhaps that the cost-benefit ratio was adverse . The Congress government decided not to carry out a further test .
 Pakistan accused of having committed aggression against India three times and continuing to sponsor terrorism in Kashmir . Although Pakistan had conducted no tests, he called Pakistan a covert nuclear weapon state .
 The propagandistic intent of the letters was particularly obvious in Vajpayee’s letters to Western leaders known for their apprehensions about China, especially the United States . The U.S. looked upon India as a champion of democracy against Chinese communism .
 The United States announced sanctions on defence sales, termination or suspension of some assistance programmes, loans, and opposition to World Bank and IMF lending . The White House expressed distress and displeasure .
 Deputy Secretary of State, Strobe Talbott, came to Islamabad to make out a case for ‘restraint and maturity’ in the eyes of a nervous world .
 The differentiation was due to the position taken by China noting that India was the first to conduct the tests and Pakistan was obliged to respond, which was appreciated in Pakistan . China noted that the tests were conducted by India and Pakistan were first to do so .
 Foreign ministers of P-5 and G-8 group of industrialised states issued a communique stating that they would work for postponement in consideration of loans by the World Bank and other international financial institutions to the two countries except for basic human needs .
 Saudi Arabia agreed to provide 100,000 barrels of oil daily on a deferred payments basis . Pakistan was faced with a grave foreign payments crisis . Saudi Arabia demonstrated its traditional solidarity with Pakistan .
 The assistance over five years was later converted into a grant . Valued at over $500 million a year, the assistance was later turned into a federal grant . The assistance was originally valued at $500million a year .
 International financial institutions did not oppose resumption of lending to Pakistan and India by international financial institutions . International lenders have been given permission to resume lending to the two countries .
 The International Monetary Fund provided a $1.1. billion credit to Pakistan for structural adjustment . Pakistan has been hit by a series of high-profile economic and political crises .
 Security Council resolution 1172 of 12 February 1999 prescribed an elaborate agenda of restraints . Resolution 1172 was passed by the U.N. Security Council .
 It is not necessary to agree with every item to say that nuclear restraints are in humanity’s interest . It is necessary to say ‘nukes are in the interest’ of humanity,’ says author .
 Initiatives to stabilise the situation would be consistent with Islamabad’s past policy . Initiatives are consistent with the past policy of Islamabad, says Shah .
 Washington seemed to abandon efforts to restrain India from accumulating an increasing stockpile of fissile material . Washington, meanwhile, seems to have abandoned efforts to curb India's stockpile .
 Washington asked for no additional safeguards to prevent reprocessing of the accumulated used fuel, from which India could extract plutonium for possible use for weapons purposes . The U.S. supplied uranium fuel for the Tarapur power reactor in the 1960s .
 It violated the law, at least in spirit, by arranging for France to provide the fuel . It violates the law by arranging to provide fuel, but it's not illegal to do so .
 Immediately after the Chaghi tests, Pakistan announced a moratorium on further tests . Pakistan also announced a ban on further testing .
 It also decided to participateaie in negotiations for the Fissile Material Cut off Treaty .
 It was willing to consider compliance with the Security Councils call for refraining from weaponisation . But that required reciprocity at par with India, it said . It said .
 The prime ministers of Pakistan and India expressed willingness to sign the CTBT by September 1999 . The three years would have expired after the treaty was opened for signature and a review conference was scheduled to be held .
 Pakistan and India's statements of intention hedged by conditions . Pakistan’s in context of removal of sanctions by the U.S. and India’�s with regard to progress in negotiations on nuclear disarmament .
 After the Vajpayee government fell, New Delhi decided to postpone a decision on signing the CTBT till after the election in October . After the election, the government decided to delay a decision until after the elections .
 Both countries claimed they were nuclear weapons states, and accelerated development of missiles . Both countries claim they are nuclear weapon states . Both claimed to have increased development of missile technology .
 Pakistani tests helped silence those in India who considered Pakistan claim to possession of nuclear capability a hoax . Impact on security as a demonstration of weapons capability .
 Perhaps even the Indian prime minister had been misled into sharing such doubts . Perhaps even he had shared such doubts with the Indian PM .
 In a statement on 28 May 1998, he said the Pakistani tests had created a 'new’ situation . Now, in a statement he said, ‘Pakistan tests have created a new situation.’
 Pakistani observers hoped that this realisation might be conducive to a reappraisal of policies of intimidation and use of force . Pakistani observers hope that this . may . be conducive . to reappraising of policies . of intimidation .
 Even before the May 1998 tests, those familiar with the apocalyptic power of nuclear weapons were outspoken in expressing the view that acquiring nuclear capability would exercise a restraining influence on jingoism .
 After overt nuclearisation, the need for caution and restraint in the conduct of Pakistan-India relations was recognised at the level of the prime ministers of the two countries .
 The two sides also agreed to reduce the risks of accidental or unauthorised use of nuclear weapons’
 Prime ministers pledged to intensify efforts for the solution of outstanding issues including that of Kashmir . The prime ministers also pledged efforts to resolve outstanding issues .
 It was tempting to conclude that the impact of the May tests was salutary . The May tests were not the first of the year to be tested in China .
 The logic of restraint was strengthened and prospects of peace became brighter . The logic was strengthened by restraint of restraint being strengthened .
 If militancy in India-held Kashmir ‘grows too much’, the general added, India could contemplate a conventional war . The general added that if militancy grows too much, it could be a 'conventional war'
 The logic of the Security Council’s exhortation evoked an apparently positive response, the author says . The logic was apparently positive, he says .
 There was no evidence to suggest that the declaration would mark a departure from the past record of procrastination, obstruction and failure in finding solutions to outstanding issues, in particular that of Kashmir .
 Kashmiris had perished in the freedom struggle in the 1990s and the state continued to bleed . Over seventy thousand Kashmiris were killed in the Kashmiris' freedom struggle .
 Kashmir people are denied the opportunity to exercise their right of self-determination, which was pledged to them by India and Pakistan and in resolutions of the Security Council . Relations between Pakistan and India would remain inflammable .
 The optimism generated by Resolution 1172 and the Lahore Declaration soon evaporated with the outbreak of the Kargil crisis in May 1999 . The Kargils crisis was the first to break the deadlock between the two sides .
 Academic debate for and against proliferation has necessarily taken place in terms of principles, but few of the participants envisage, advocate or apprehend the spread of nuclear weapons to many additional states . The academic debate is necessarily taken into account principles but few envisage the spread .
 Only India, Israel and Pakistan, not parties to the NPT, acquired nuclear capability . Argentina and Brazil renounced nuclear option they were earlier developing . South Africa dismantled nuclear devices once the white supremacist regime reconciled itself to blackmajority rule .
 Iran denies allegations of pursuing the weapons option . North Korea claims to possess the technology . Iran denies the allegations .
 Medium and small powers, in their view, lack the resources, the mutual learning experience, and the technical safeguards that help the superpowers manage crises . Small powers lack resources and the mutual experience to manage crises, they say .
 They could lose control over these weapons, imperilling their own people as well as the world community . For these or other reasons, they may lose control of these weapons .
 Other political scientists, on both historical and doctrinal grounds, do not share the above view, however, however . Other political science experts disagree with the view .
 Founded in logic, the deterrence argument is also upheld by empirical evidence . Founded by logic, it was also upheld in empirical evidence, says the author .
 Nuclear weapons have helped maintain peace and prevent military adventures in the past . There is no reason to expect that the future will be different . Nuclear weapons are important to maintain peace .
 Even a powerful state is unlikely to resort to aggression if it concludes that the potential gains are not worth the risks it has to risk . Even powerful states are unlikely to use aggression if they conclude that the risks are worth the risk .
 It has been estimated that a single 20-kiloton bomb, exploded over a densely populated city, could cause 130,000 instantaneous deaths . A single bomb exploded over an area of the city could have caused 130,500 deaths .
 Over 200,000 people would suffer blast injuries and radiation burns, and many times more would be condemned to a life worse than death due to ingestion of high doses of radiation and the consequent increase in cancer, abortion and genetic defects .
 The awesome potential for destruction invests nuclear weapons with an unequalled power of deterrence . Nuclear weapons have the power to destroy and destroy, but also have the potential to destroy .
 The possibility that nudear weapons might be used in desperation by an attacked state should foreclose the thought of resorting to war in pursuit of conquest and expansion .
 This has been the main rationale for the acquisition of nudear capabilities by states that lack the conventional power to deter aggression . The main rationale is that states lacking conventional power, such as Russia and China .
 It was advanced as the principal argument for Ukraine retaining nuclear weapons . Ukraine inherited the nuclear weapons it inherited upon the disintegration of the Soviet Union . The argument was used as an argument for retaining the weapons .
 Arguments against proliferation fail to carry conviction, partly because they are advanced mostly by states that do not themselves practice the precept they preach . Arguments about proliferation do not carry conviction because they're not themselves .
 The dangers-of proliferation of nuclear weapons are too serious to be dismissed or ignored . Nevertheless, the arguments should be examined on their merits in order to reduce the dangers .
 Miscalculation, for instance, brought the United States and the Soviet Union perilously close to disaster in the Cuban missiles crisis in 1962 . The U.S. and Soviet Union were at odds with each other in the 1960s .
 Nuclear powers have to devise and institute agreed precautionary measures to prevent such perils . Nuclear powers need to devise, institute agreed measures to preclude perils, say experts .
 Procedures need to be tightened to prevent theft and clandestine diversion of nuclear materials, experts say . Procedures must be tightened, they say, to prevent such a thing happening .
 In the 1960s, 93. kilograms of enriched uranium was diverted from a U.S. plant to Israel . 93 kilograms of uranium was sent to Israel from the United States in the 60s . The U.N. nuclear weapons program ended in 1994 .
 Neither the USA nor the European community expressed remorse for their collusion . Neither the U.S. nor the EU expressed remorse .
 For over a quarter of a century, a Norwegian firm supplied heavy water, directly or through intermediaries, to Argentina, India, Israel, Israel and South Africa .
 It is desirable that precautions, procedures, and confidencebuilding measures to reduce the dangers of miscalculation, accidents, and theft be shared with the others . Considering humanity’s stake in precluding nuclear dangers, it is obviously desirable that .
 Command and control institutions and procedures in the neo-nuclear states should be improved, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 The targeting of some small’ states only for expression of exaggerated fears cannot be constructive . But the targeting of small' states is not constructive, it is only a matter of expression .
 Even with nuclear weapons, a less powerful state ‘will face a number of difficult constraints in attempting to construct a survivable deterrent force,’ 22 especially if it is condemned .
 Inadequacy of resources could create dangerous dilemmas if a state ends up with an unsurvivable nuclear capability as well as a degraded conventional force . Inadequate resources could lead to a state ending up with a nuclear capability .
 Unable to deal with a local conflict by conventional means, it might come under pressure to raise the stakes . It might come face to face with the fateful ‘use or lose’ dilemma .
 The contingencies warranting a summons to the weapon of last resort should be clearly and carefully defined . It should be carefully defined, including the contingencies of the situation .
 Deep penetration of a state’s territory by adversary forces, and large-scale attacks threatening to overwhelm and destroy its defensive capability, are types of situations likely to trigger consideration of use of nuclear weapons . The situation is likely to lead to consideration of using nuclear weapons, experts say .
 What choice a victim of aggression should make between capitulation and annihilation is a cruel question to which only the people of a state can give an answer . Only the people can give the answer to this cruel question .
 After overt nuclearisation the pristine simplicity of assumptions about nuclear deterrence has given way to a new set of issues . Some of the old ones are surrounded in a fog of confusion, says David Cameron .
 To be sure, a nuclear arsenal should not be so small as to be vulnerable to a pre-emptive strike . The U.S. should not have a small nuclear arsenal that is vulnerable to an attack, he says .
 The numbers don't have to be so large as to be unaffordable by a medium state . But neither do the numbers have to go so large that they are unaffordable .
 So long as a states strategic arsenal is sufficient to survive the first strike and still deliver ‘unacceptable damage,’ it does not have to match the adversary’s arsenal . So long if a state has a strategic arsenal that survives first strike, it doesn't have to
 The Soviet Union and the U.S. built stockpiles to peak levels of 45,000 and 32,500 nuclear warheads . It is explained mainly in the context of 'extended deterrence' involving their responsibility to ensure the security of their allies .
 Medium nuclear powers have not considered it necessary to build thousands of warheads . Medium nuclear nations have not built thousands of nuclear warheads . The U.S. has no nuclear arms program for medium nuclear powers .
 It is inconceivable that a responsible government or leader would risk the nuclear devastation of a single metropolis for the satisfaction of vanquishing an adversary .
 The key to the credibility and efficacy of the deterrent is not numbers but survivability of the nuclear force . The U.S. should not rely on numbers but the survivability and credibility of its nuclear force, experts say .
 If, for instance, five or ten bombs are considered necessary for deterrence, then that number should be sure to survive a surprise attack for delivery and unacceptable destruction of high value targets .
 If the adversary develops the capacity for pre-emption and interception, the arsenal has then to be correspondingly augmented . The arsenal has to be augmented to cope with the threat of an adversary .
 If air bases or launch platforms are in danger of being destroyed by a surprise attack, it becomes necessary to build indestructible silos and to develop mobile missiles . The U.S. needs to develop and build silos to protect itself from surprise attacks .
 The economic burden of a small nuclear arsenal is not a decisive constraint on a medium states decision on whether or not to acquire these weapons, says CNN.com's Peter Bergen .
 The cost of designing, building and testing a plutonium-based nuclear device was estimated in a United Nations study in 1968 at $100 million . The United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency estimated the cost at $51 million in 1976 . The U.N. study estimated a plutonium
 If a country already possessed the fissile material, the figure according to ACDA dropped to $1 million . ACDA: If a nation already had the material, it would be at least $2 million .
 India and Pakistan each spends billions of dollars annually on defence . While these figures might be two to three times higher in the depreciated dollars of 1994, the expenditures would not greatly strain the budgets of the two countries . Pakistan and India are each spending billions on defence annually .
 In a nuclear environment the conventional forces do not have to be maintained or equipped for strategic deterrence . In addition to the burden of a nuclear force, allowance should be made for possible containment of the defence budget, says David Cameron .
 From the inception of the programme, Pakistan viewed nuclear weapons as a means of deterring and preventing war, not of fighting one . Pakistan's nuclear weapons were seen as a deterrent not of war, but of fighting .
 According to this doctrine, the size of the nuclear arsenal should be the minimum necessary to ensure the credibility of the deterrence, the U.S. says . According to the doctrine, this is the minimum .
 The quantity and quality of the weapons and delivery system have to be readjusted to the adversary’s military build-up and capability for pre-emption and interception . The quality and quantity of weapons and deliveries system must be adjusted to the enemy's military build up .
 The guiding principle is to maintain, preserve and upgrade the size in order to ensure that a number sufficient for credible deterrence would reach targets, says the U.S. government .
 Every nuclear state determines the size of its defence force according to its own security and economic circumstances . The size of a nuclear state's defence force is determined by its security, economic circumstances, according to the US .
 Strategic analysts have held the view that nuclear deterrence does not depend on parity of arsenals . Strategic analysts argue in favour of the efficacy of nuclear deterrence .
 Even a smaller arsenal is considered sufficient for the limited purpose in view . Even a small arsenal is thought to be sufficient .
 Nuclear deterrence by contrast with the conventional one is not dependent on parity or ratio between arsenals . Nuclear deterrence does not depend on parity, ratio of arsenals or ratio of weapons .
 The Soviet Union possessed deterrent capability during the Cuban crisis even though its nuclear arsenal was a fraction of the size of the U.S. The United States has a nuclear arsenal of more than 100,000 nukes .
 China did not seek to match either, much less both bomb for bomb, missile for missile . China, which was once threatened by two superpowers, did not want to match them . China is now the only superpower in the world to have a nuclear strike .
 hawkish commentators in India advocate the build-up of a full-fledged strategic arsenal of thermo-nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles of inter-continental range . That is an eminently sane view, even though it came under question by hawkish commentators .
 Such over-zealous super-patriots misled the U.S. and the Soviet Union into a race that rational analysts now consider insane . The Soviet Union and the United States are now considered insane .
 The logic of complete nuclear disarmament does not appeal to strategic thinkers in the new nuclear-capable states any more than it did in the nuclear-weapons states . The logic is not the same as it was in nuclear-armed states, writes Andrew Hammond .
 Nuclear powers do not consider a nuclear-free world an acceptable idea . Even after the Cold War, nuclear powers consider such a non-nuclear world acceptable ideas .
 Medium powers lack requisite resources and access to the new weapons . But this option is not in sight of medium powers that lack access to weapons .
 The ideal of a nuclear-free world will have to await a transformation of the security environment, globally and regionally . The ideal is to await the transformation of security environment globally and globally, globally .
 Limitation of nuclear weapons or capabilities is, however, a practical proposition . Limitations of nuclear capabilities is not a reality-based reality, however .
 It can serve the interests not only of humankind in general, but also of the states involved . It can save expenditures on an unnecessary nuclear arms race and reduce the dangers inherent in nuclear weapons . The U.S. should not engage in an unnecessary arms race .
 Such a practical approach would be consistent with the resolutions of the U.N. General Assembly . The United Nations has been criticized by some of the world's most powerful nations .
 The two countries still retain over three-quarters of the world stock of nuclear weapons . Clearly the magnitude of the reduction is impressive .
 States with large nuclear weapons stockpiles can hardly ignore, much less rebuff, this trend if they are to retain credibility . U.S. states with large stockpiles of nuclear weapons are hardly able to ignore this trend .
 Pakistan has supported proposals for a nuclear limitation regime, globally and regionally . Pakistan has backed proposals for the nuclear limitations regime . The country has a long history of nuclear weapons .
 Limitation is preferable because it would prevent the unnecessary build-up of nuclear arsenals . Limitation would prevent an unnecessary build up of nuclear weapons, experts say . Limitations would be preferable because of the need to limit nuclear weapons .
 The Clinton administration revised the proposal in 1993 to include France, Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom . To accommodate India’s concern for balance in the conference, the proposal was revised in 1993 .
 India wanted an assurance in advance that any limitation proposal would apply to all ‘geopolitically relevant’ countries, arguing not only that its ‘security problems include China,’’ 7 but also extended to the presence of great power forces in the ocean to its
 Faced with India’s rejection of a regional approach to limitation of nuclear capabilities, Washington gave up and reverted to the Pakistanspecific policy . The Senate apparently wants Pakistan to roll back its nuclear program, and in effect, give up the nuclear option unilaterally .
 Pakistan's nuclear capability is, and will continue to be, the smallest of all eight nuclear weapon states . The argument of 'an all-out arms race’ is inapplicable to Pakistan because of Pakistan’s nuclear capability . Pakistan has the smallest nuclear capability of all
 Pakistan has not tried to match India bomb for bomb or missile for missile . India has not been able to match Pakistan's bomb for missile or missile .
 India can make many times more bombs, has multiple air-, land and sea-based launchers and is engaged in serial production of ballistic missiles . India can also have multiple air-and-sea-based missile launchers .
 A race implies competition in quantity or quality, which has not motivated the Pakistani programme . A race is not a race, but a race is a competition in quality, not quantity, quality .
 "The sole purpose of this expensive pursuit has been the need to deter aggression," says the president . "We are not seeking prestige nor one-upmanship," he says .
 The guiding principle as to size is that a small nuclear arsenal is enough, so long as it is sufficient and survivable . The U.S. should not have a nuclear arsenal, the author says .
 Statesmen and scholars worry about a similar possibility in other countries which lack the resources to put fail-safe mechanisms in place .
 States with nuclear weapons have learned to address and contain the risks of accidents or unauthorised use . The risks of an accident or use of a nuclear weapon are high, experts say .
 Apart from strengthening command and control, they developed fail-safe mechanisms . Apart from strengthened command-control, they also strengthened fail-free mechanisms .
 Pakistan and India could benefit if the older nuclear states provided relevant information and equipment . Since such arcane technology requires time and expense to develop, such technology can't be developed quickly .
 At first they were reluctant, because to do so would imply recognition of the nuclear status of Pakistan and India . At first it was because to recognise them would mean recognition of their nuclear status . Pakistan's nuclear status was not recognised by the West .
 U.S. re-evaluated its policy for nuclear threat reduction measures for India and Pakistan . New dangers including that of terrorists gaining access to nuclear materials .
 In the U.S. and Russia the presidents are vested with the authority to take the fateful decision . In the United States and Russia, the president is the ultimate decision maker .
 Only they can give the coded signals without which nuclear weapons cannot be armed for explosion . Also, they carry Black Boxes and only they can . give the codes without which they cannot . be armed .
 Every other nuclear state, too, must develop a system of command and control to obviate the inherent risks . The U.S. must also develop a way of controlling nuclear weapons in order to avoid the risks, experts say .
 In February 2000 Pakistan set up a National Command Authority with the President as Chairman and Prime Minister as Vice Chairman . President as chairman of the authority . Prime Minister was Vice Chairman of the Command Authority .
 The decision-making process would involve advisers and experts from foreign affairs and from security establishments .
 Strategic Plans Division, which acts as the secretariat, has responsibilities that include research and development, up-gradation and application of stringent custodial controls .
 A state with truly peaceful intentions should renounce first-use of not only nuclear, but also conventional weapons . A truly peaceful state must renounce the use of conventional weapons, says CNN's Peter Bergen .
 India trumpet* the no-first-use of nuclear weapons but reserves for itself the right to use conventional force . India has a nuclear weapon policy that includes the use of conventional force, not nuclear weapons .
 China’s commitment to peace is manifest from its policy of renunciation of first-use of nuclear weapons as well as a policy of peace toward neighbours . China has renounced the use of nuclear arms as a weapon of peace .
 Strategic weapons provide unmatched deterrence, they do not eliminate the need for adequate conventional defence capability to cope with situations short of general war .
 Even a local and low-intensity conflict might be misperceived as commencement of general hostilities . If conventional capacity is eroded, even a local conflict might not be a war, it could lead to more hostilities .
 Inherent in such a situation is the danger of making the weapon of last-resort a weapon-of-first-resorts . Inherently in this is the risk of making a weapon of first-reservation a weapon first .
 A responsible nuclear state has an obligation to its own people, as well as the world, to ensure maximum possible delay before invoking the strategic option, writes Andrew Hammond . A responsible state has a responsibility to its people, he says .
 India's polemical approach to nuclear issues was manifest in its attribution of Pakistan’s achievement of nuclear capability to the transfer of technology from outside . India's 'polemical' approach was evident in its attributions of Pakistan's achievement of a nuclear capability .
 The propaganda ignored the capacity of Pakistani scientists to assimilate knowledge in the public domain fifty years after the nuclear bomb was invented . Pakistan has made prodigious material sacrifices due to imposition of sanctions .
 Indian spokesmen exposed bias by shutting their eyes to the fact that India was the first developing country to receive massive transfers of nuclear technology from foreign countries .
 They were either duped by Indian professions of peaceful intentions or led by power politics to assist India’s pursuit of nuclear ambition . They were duped, they were either led by . power politics or aided by the pursuit of . nuclear ambition, they said .
 The instigation ecame all the more sinister after 9/11 when the world was alarmed hat terrorists might gain access to nuclear materials and technology r even mini nukes . World was alarmed that terrorists might be able to access nuclear materials .
 Reports surfaced in 2003 that a ransnational underworld network of manufactures and suppliers from number of Asian, European and African countries engaged in landestine trade in nuclear materials and technology .
 Khan was the lead of the uranium enrichment programme for 25 years until 2001 . He was accused of involvement with landestine manufacturers and traders from a number of countries, ncluding Britain .
 Iran, Libya and North Korea were reported to have received centrifuges . North Korea and Libya were also reported to be receiving centrifugees .
 Evidence in support of the allegation nduded centrifuges and drawings for a crude explosive device handed to the United States by Libya .
 AEA learned that Iran was engaged in uranium enrichment research, he Khan network was alleged to be involved in the supply of e. technology . Similarly, the Khan network alleged to have been involved in supplying e.tech to Iran .
 Pakistan acted expeditiously to contain the damage by agreeing to :ooperate in the investigation of allegations . Pakistan agreed to cooperate with the investigation by Pakistan .
 Lim was popularly ‘egarded as a national hero, the president granted him a pardon and he government declined to permit any foreign agency to interrogate lim . Lim was granted a pardon by the president of the country .
 Pakistan government obtained the relevant nformation through the interrogation of accused individuals . The Pakistan government says it obtained the information through interrogation of individuals .
 Investigation confirmed he and some of his subordinates had indulged in the sale of technology . Investigation confirmed that he and his subordinates . He and others were indulging in the sales of technology.
 Inquiry also concluded that he government had not authorised any transfer, and that the sale was mi account of the personal greed of a few persons . The inquiry concluded that the government did not authorize any transfer .
 President Pervez Musharraf’s government took measures both before and after 9/11 to streamline command and control and strengthen custodial security of strategic assets . Fortunately, the U.S. concerns were anticipated, and the United States was not concerned .
 Pakistani scientists involved in underground network of suppliers and traffickers of nuclear equipment and technology . Involvement of Pakistani scientists in the underground network kept Pakistan in the limelight .
 The United States evinced understanding of the leakage and accepted the result of the official inquiry . The U.S. has accepted the results of the inquiry .
 A similar lapse had taker place in the United States a decade earlier . Perhaps it recalled that a similar lapse occurred in the U.S. a decade ago .
 Pakistan took effective measures to prevent any further leakage of technology . The lapse continued to provoke international concerns about Pakistan’s capacity to ensure foolproof custodial safety .
 Japan’s Prime Minister Koizumi expressed ‘serious concern’ regarding international black market networks . Earlier the Japanese ambassador told the media that Tokyo wanted more information .
 As for the danger of weapons or material falling into the hands of extremists, she did not discuss the subject in the open . ‘We have noted this problem, and we are prepared to try to deal with it.’
 Pakistan provided parts of old and discarded centrifuges to IAEA for comparison with Iran's . Iran had bought the centrifugas on the underground market . Pakistan decided to provide the parts to the IAEa .
 Iran confirmed it had received centrifuges of Pakistani origin . The comparison confirmed Iran had received the centrifugs from Pakistan . Iran said the comparison confirmed it was made by Iran .
 Iran says enriched uranium IAEA found in Iran was not produced by Iran . That substantiated Iran’s claim that enriched uranium in Iran wasn’t made by Iran, Iran says . Iran also said enriched uranium was not made in Iran .
 U.S. experts were said to have conceived a plan for simultaneous covert and overt assault on all nuclear facilities that were regarded ‘unintentionally unsecure or intentionally hostile’
 Concerns now focused on Central Asia Republics, Iran, Libya and Pakistan . Analysts feared Muslim extremists might gain access to nuclear weapons and radioactive materials .
 Experts say the U.S. should seek verifiable evidence that known stockpiles had been secured . The experts suggested that the United States seek such evidence .
 The U.S. wanted to be prepared for a pre-emptive strike on unsecured facilities with a new generation of precision-guided, small-yield nuclear weapons that could penetrate down into underground bunkers .
 As force-multipliers, missiles enhance both offensive and defensive capability . The Threat of Destabilization in the U.S. is the result of the threat of instability in the world .
 Armed with nuclear warheads, missiles make deterrence more credible as they are more difficult to intercept than aircraft . Armed with nukes, missiles are more likely to be more effective than aircrafts, experts say .
 missiles greatly increase the first strike capability of a state, degrading the survivability and therefore the credibility of the adversary’s nuclear deterrent . Also, missiles also increase the . capability of the state, according to the author of the book .
 What was sufficient before would become insufficient after the missiles enter the scene, he says . New dilemmas are connected with threats to the survivability of a small nuclear force, he adds .
 To guard against such an eventuality, the threatened state would be faced with the necessity of the enlargement and dispersal of its nuclear arsenal and launchers, the author says .
 It also gives India capability to launch these missiles against Pakistan from distant sites . The missiles will be launched from a range range of sites in Pakistan .
 Another missile under development by India is a polar space launch vehicle with intercontinental range capability . Another missile is an intercontinental launch vehicle . The missile is also being developed by India to be able to launch intercontinental missiles .
 Indian programme to produce an anti-missile system has received technological assistance from Russia and Israel . Pakistan’s concern is that India has received technology assistance from both countries .
 Pakistan responded to the situation with missiles of its own. Gravely concerned, Pakistan responded with missiles . Pakistan responded .
 Pakistan first approached China for supply of missiles in the late 1980s . Pakistan also received a small number of short-range tactical missiles from China in the 1980s.
 China and Pakistan explained that international law did not prohibit trade in missiles . International law does not prohibit the trade in missile missiles, they said . Pakistan and China have been accused of smuggling missiles .
 Washington did little to restrain India from inducting missiles into South Asia . More surprising for Pakistan was the fact that Washington did not .
 Pakistan also launched a missile research and development programme of its own . Pakistan has also launched an own missile programme .
 Over the years, it has indigenously produced a variety of ballistic missiles . The country has produced a range of missiles, including missiles, in the past .
 Even with conventional warheads, ballistic missiles represent a qualitative leap in weapons systems . Ballistic missiles are a step up from conventional warheads to conventional ones .
 Manchester United striker Gareth Bale has a reputation for his ability to strike in the air . He has a history of scoring goals in the Premier League, scoring at least one goal a day .
 If used to bomb urban areas, they are an instrument of intimidation and terror, they can spread panic and demoralise the population . If used in urban areas they are a weapon of intimidation .
 Missiles can be used to deliver knockout punches at airfields, arms and ammunition depots, petroleum storage facilities, communication junctions, etc. Secondly, missiles can also be used in airfields and arms depots .
 Attack by such missiles can undermine the victim's will and capacity to resist aggression . Attack by missiles can thus undermine the victims' will and ability to resist aggressions .
 Tests of missiles have to be conducted for validating the technology and also for development and improving accuracy . Tests of missile technology have been conducted to validate the technology .
 Pakistan does not have the credibility of deterrence, nor is it affordable for Pakistan . But matching the adversary test for test and missile for missile is neither necessary nor affordable for the country . The test is neither a test nor a missile test, nor a test for a missile .
 The international debt had doubled from about $18 billion in 1988 to $36 billion in 1998 . International debt had also doubled to about $40 billion in 1997 .
 For statements of Indian National Congress leaders, see under Retrospect in Chapter 21 . For statements from leaders of the Indian National Party, see Under Retrospect .
 Diplomacy, Democracy and the Bomb, excerpt published in Dawn, Islamabad, 23 January 2005 .
 Malik was quoted to have added that ‘Nuclear deterrence only restricts an all-out war employing weapons of mass destruction' Malik said that if militancy (in Jammu and Kashmir) grows too big, both the initiator,e.e.i.e.,e.
 She gave Defence Minister Moshe Dayan permission to activate Israel's Doomsday weapons . According to Spedal Report on ‘How Israel Got the Bomb' in Time of 12 April 1976, 39 .
 Robert S McNamara, The Changing Nature of Global Security And Its Impact On South Asia . McNamara: The Changing nature of global security and its impact on South Asia is changing .
 In 1983, Norway authorised sale of 15 tons of heavy water through the West German firm of Alfred Hampel to Romania, which was airlifted instead to Switzerland and then flown to Mumbai .
 Hampel is alleged to have exported 70 tons of heavy water from China to Argentina and India . Hampel was alleged to be involved in the alleged export of water to China .
 The remark was made by former U.S. defense secretary, Harold Brown . Brown is a former United States defense secretary .
 Also flgum about the nuclear arsenals of other countries are taken from this source .
 Protagonists of such a view included Brahma Chellaney, a frequent commentator on strategic issues . Protagonist of such an opinion was Brahma .
 Paul Nitze (‘Is It Time To Junk Our Nukes?’, The Washington Post, 16 January 1994) recommends that the U.S. should convert ‘its principal strategic deterrent from nuclear weapons to a more credible deterrent based at least in part upon smart conventional
 The Washington Post, 7 July 1994, despatch entitled ‘United States Efforts to Curb Nuclear Weapons in Peril as India Insists on Limits for China’ by Thomas W Lippman .
 U.S. Congressional Research Service Report, Dawn, Islamabad, Pakistan, was published in 2005 . The report was published by the United States.
 Report by Institute for Science and International Security, Washington, Pakistan .
 Discarded centrifuges and weapon designs were smuggled out, some of the components were procured from suppliers in Europe . Manufacturing was done in workshops in Malaysia, Turkey and South Africa, and equipment was shipped via Dubai .
 The IAEA was trying to determine whether Iran and North Korea also received nuclear weapons information . Iran and N. Korea are believed to have received information from the IAEa . North Korea is believed to be one of the most secretive countries in the world .
 He then showed to the President the stolen blueprints of P-1 centrifuge sold to Iran, P-2 sold to several countries, and drawings of a uranium plant .
 Condoleezza Rice was confirmed as secretary of state-designate in 2005 . Rice's confirmation hearing was held at the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in Islamabad .
 U.S. State Department: 'We certainly don't see any connection with the leadership of Pakistan’
 The phrasing in the paragraph is based on a draft paper contributed by an Indian scholar at the Shanghai workshop in February, 1994 .
 Chengappa, op. at, 38, quoting A Kalam. head of India's 10 billion rupees defence research programme . Chengappa: "A Kalam is the head of the 10 billion- rupee defence programme"
 Shaheen-II tested on 19 March 2005 had a range of 2000 km, Dawn, Islamabad, 20 March 2005 . Shaheeen-II was tested in Islamabad, Pakistan, in 2005 .
 Pakistan rose from isolation to a position of international respect and admiration for its courageous role in support of the Afghans struggle against Soviet intervention . The turn of the decade reversed the trend of isolation .
 The process started with a return of the international limelight on Pakistan’s nuclear programme . The imposition of sanctions by the United States by the U.S. was the first step in the process . Pakistan's nuclear programme has been subject to international scrutiny .
 The world community initially blamed India for repression and gross violation of human rights in Kashmir . The world became increasingly critical also of Pakistan’s interference in the state . Pakistan has been accused of interference in Kashmir in the past .
 Islamabad's declarations that its role was limited to political, diplomatic and moral support for the liberation struggle were openly questioned . Islamabad’s declarations that . its . role was . limited to . political, . diplomatic, moral and . moral support .
 Washington took the lead by considering inclusion of Pakistan in the list of states accused of sponsoring terrorism . Pakistan has been accused of supporting terrorism in Pakistan .
 As the only state that recognised the Taliban regime, Pakistan was saddled with the responsibility for their policies . Pakistan is saddled . with responsibility for the policies of the Taliban .
 Poor governance, reckless international borrowing and rampant corruption added to Pakistan’s increasing loss of prestige . Poor governance and reckless international borrows added to the increasing loss in Pakistan . Pakistan is losing prestige as a result of poor governance and international borrowing .
 Stringent international sanctions imposed after the 1998 nuclear tests aggravated the economic plight of the country . Stringent sanctions were imposed following the 1998 test nuclear tests . The South Korean economy has been hit hard by international sanctions .
 Intervention by army and overthrow of elected government in October 1999 attracted ‘democracy sanctions’ that tightened the financial squeeze . Intervention by the army and the overthrow of an elected government attracted 'democracy sanctions' in 1999 .
 General Pervez Musharraf’s government began the process of rescuing the state from international isolation . To cope with the challenge, the government began to rescue the state of Pakistan .
 It began with earnest internal reforms and stringent austerity that averted further borrowing . The government’s decision to cooperate with the United States in the war on terrorism after 9/11 rehabilitated the state in the international mainstream .
 Washington asked Islamabad to discontinue the weapons research programme . Washington asked Pakistan to stop the weapons programme .
 The U.S. president must provide an annual certificate that Pakistan does not possess a nuclear weapon . Failure to do so, economic and military assistance to Pakistan was prohibited . Adopted by the Senate in 1985, it required the United States president to provide the certificate .
 President Ronald Reagan had issued the certificate without much fuss . So long as the Soviet forces were in Afghanistan, the certificate was issued without fuss .
 President George Bush did the same in 1989 but then the United States became intrusive and demanding about the research the U.S. knew Pakistan had been carrying on for many years . President Bush declined to issue the certificate in 1990 but then became more intrusive .
 The United States cut off $700 million in assistance it was pledged to provide to Pakistan annually during 1988-94 . The U.S. cut off the aid during that period . Pakistan was given the assistance it pledged to give to Pakistan during the period .
 Pakistan also declined to permit the transfer of F-16 aircrafts and other military equipment for which the U.S. had earlier cleared commercial contracts with manufacturers . Pakistan had paid a billion dollars in cash in cash .
 An embargo was even ordered on the return of Pakistan-owned equipment sent to the U.S. for repairs with costs paid in advance .
 The United States decision revived the bitter memories of Pakistan’s past grievances of United States refusal to honour commitments . Predictably, the U.S. decision revived memories of the past .
 It was manifestly wrong for the U.S. to renege on the six-year agreement for economic and military assistance . The United States was wrong for reneging on the agreement, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The injustice of refusing to deliver the F-16s for which Pakistan had paid was not rectified until 1995 . President Clinton finally acknowledged it was unfair to keep both the equipment and the cash, and ordered reimbursement .
 International financial institutions and bilateral donors, especially Japan, did not follow the U.S. example . Japan was providing $500 million a year .
 The government failed to adjust budgetary policies and was progressively caught in a debt trap . Still the economy suffered a severe jolt and the predicament continued to aggravate .
 People of common ethnicity on both sides of the border must travel and trade . This included the necessity of conducing official business with the authorities in Kabul on matters of travel .
 The return of refugees required negotiations with the Taliban who controlled three-quarter of Afghanistan’s territory . The Taliban controlled three quarters of Afghanistan's territory .
 Many of them, having lived in refugee camps in Pakistan, evinced goodwill and friendship . Many of the refugees in the refugee camps have lived in Pakistan . The refugee camp is located in Pakistan's capital Islamabad .
 It could not have foreseen that the Taliban would prove unreasonable and rigid and commit one blunder after another, provoking international outrage . The Taliban would have been expected to be reasonable and rigid .
 Islamabad failed to foresee that the Taliban were internationally perceived to be the creation of Pakistan . Pakistan's Taliban was seen as the Taliban as the nation's creation . Pakistan failed to see that the Pakistani Taliban was the Taliban's creation of the country .
 International opinion believed Pakistan was involved in assisting the Taliban in the internal struggle for control and domination . Pakistan has been accused of supporting the Taliban since 2001 .
 Uzbekistan was not alone in criticizing Pakistani recognition as ‘external meddling’ 2 while ignoring interference by other countries . Pakistan has provided large assistance in cash and arms to the opposition factions, fuelling the civil war in Afghanistan .
 Pakistan was the only friend of the Taliban, Pakistan was blamed for their policies . Pakistan was also blamed for the Taliban's policies .
 Pakistan tried to persuade friendly countries to recognise the Taliban regime but with little success . The Taliban regime has been banned in Pakistan since 2001 . Pakistan has not recognised the Taliban since then .
 Even the OIC and the ECO refused to accept the Taliban regime . Not just the U.N. even the UN, even the . OIC . and the . ECO refused . The Taliban regime was overthrown by the Taliban .
 Saudi Arabia and UAE recognised the Taliban but found their anachronistic interpretation of Islam unacceptable . The Taliban were banned from the kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 2001 .
 Iran not only denounced Taliban extremism but also enhanced assistance to the opposition warlords . Iran has increased assistance to warlords in the past .
 Arab and Central Asian neighbours were antagonised by the Taliban's support for their dissident nationals . The Taliban were encouraged by the encouragement, training and assistance they gave to their dissidents .
 The fact that Paldstan lacked the means and the leverage to influence the Taliban, were ignored . The Taliban did not have the means to influence them, and the U.S. did little to influence it .
 Pakistan anxious as always to maintain cooperative relations with Afghanistan and cognisant of the Taliban’s friendly disposition toward Pakistan, proffered counsel and advice for moderation, which would have helped save them from the predictable consequences of their policies . Pakistan, anxious to maintain cooperation with Afghanistan,
 The first intercession was made by Nawaz Sharif’s government in 1998 but with little effect . The first such intercession, suggesting the Taliban restrain Osama Bin Laden, was made in 1998 .
 The Taliban leadership was dismissive of criticism and persisted in its suicidal course . Convinced of their rectitude and impervious to the remonstrations of other Islamic countries, the Taliban leaders were dismissive .
 Instead of heeding the Pakistan government’s advice, they relied on religious parties in Pakistan for support . They even exported their obscurantist views by influencing Pakistani counterparts, influencing their counterparts, giving shelter to extremists and proclaimed offenders .
 The Taliban lost control of the country within days of the start of the coalition attack .
 Corruption undermined international goodwill for Pakistan, says Pakistanis . Corruption at high levels was a key issue for Pakistan's international goodwill . Corruption was a major problem for the country, especially in Pakistan .
 Transparency International, a monitoring organization in Germany, declared Pakistan as the second most corrupt country in the world . Pakistan has been declared as the most corrupt in Pakistan by Transparency International .
 Poor governance, fiscal extravagance, mounting budgetary deficits and an escalating debt burden pushed Pakistan to the brink of insolvency . Poor governance and rising debt have pushed Pakistan into the verge of bankruptcy .
 By 1999, the accumulated burden of foreign debt amounted to $38 billion and the annual cost of servicing it to over $5 billion . By 1999 the accumulated foreign debt had reached $38billion . The debt burden has grown to $50 billion .
 With exports stagnant at $8 billion, the payments gap widened and recurrent scams and defaulted loans of nationalised banks raised the spectre of a deep economic crisis and financial crash .
 The government resorted to a freeze of $11 billion in foreign currency deposits . The state had attracted by the solemn pledge of transferability . The government had attracted the state had .
 The deposits could now be cashed only in devalued rupees, involving a loss of 30 per cent to account holders expecting payment in foreign currency . Account holders expecting to receive payment from foreign currency can now only accept deposits .
 The default antagonised hundreds of thousands of people who had trusted the government . The default has antagonised many of the government's most trusted citizens .
 Dialogue between Pakistan and India was suspended in 1994 because it proved sterile . It was reopened in February 1997 at the level of foreign secretaries . Pakistan-India Dialogue, 1997-99
 The Indian emphasis was, as usual, on normalisation of trade and travel, though it was willing to discuss all issues . The Indian focus was on normalising trade, travel and travel .
 Gujral reportedly pleaded that his minority government was too weak to make a bold policy shift . He reportedly told the government he was too scared to make bold policy shifts .
 Sharif says no government in Pakistan, however strong its majority in parliament, could ignore popular opinion in the country . Sharif countered by saying that no government can ignore the opinion of the people .
 Kashmiri people welcomed the talks, but Kashmiri spokesman says they would not be able to reach a deal between two without the association of the third party . Kashmiri government says any attempt to strike a deal would fail to yield a credible settlement .
 In June 1997, the foreign secretaries of the two countries met in Islamabad . They agreed to recommence dialogue on all outstanding issues of concern to the two sides .
 He and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif concluded the most prolific, if not successful, summit with three documents . The two leaders concluded the summit with a series of documents .
 The two sides also undertook to provide each other with advance notification in respect of ballistic missile flight tests . The U.S. and South Korea will also provide advance notification of missile tests .
 The Lahore documents were comprehensive and covered the whole gamut of issues of bilateral interest . They included commitment to ‘intensify efforts to resolve all issues, including the issue of Jammu and Kashmir’ The summit was a grand if ephemeral success .
 Neither the beginning nor the end of the summit proved auspicious, however, however . Neither the start nor end of this week's summit proved to be auspicious .
 Lahore protests in Lahore against India's brutal repression in Kashmir . It was greeted with vociferous protests against India’s brutal repression .
 Indian leaders downplayed the importance of the commitment to resolve the outstanding issues . On return to New Delhi, the Indian leaders played down the importance .
 The 'Lahore process' glorified by the two sides was considered to provide a convenient alibi to world opinion, and especially influential powers, to abdicate responsibility to promote a just settlement of Kashmir question .
 Pakistan’s view that the Line of Control ‘resulting from the ceasefire of 17 December 1971’ was, like the 1949 ceasefire line, a temporary arrangement to be respected by both sides . It invested this temporary line with a characteristic that applies to international boundaries .
 A grave crisis erupted following intrusion of armed personnel from Pakistan into the Kargil heights in Kashmir in May 1999 . The crisis was triggered by an attack on Pakistan's border with Kashmir .
 Islamabad denied the facts and attributed the fighting to Kashmiri freedom fighters . Islamabad had promised to intensify efforts to resolve all issues, including Jammu and Kashmir, at the Lahore Summit .
 Indian leaders in statements on return to Delhi portrayed insincerity and absence of serious intent . Indian leaders said they were not serious enough to take part in talks .
 UN Security Council’s call in its resolution of June 1998 for the resumption of dialogue to remove the root causes of tensions, including Kashmir, was not followed up . Indian Home Minister Lai Krishna Advani had embarked on a ‘proactive’ policy, intensified repression
 Statements issued by the G-8, the United States, Britain and Germany implicitly blamed Pakistan for the ‘intruders’ in Kargil . The U.S. and Britain, Germany and the U.K. made the statements in a statement .
 India has accused Pakistan of aggression . Describing them as Islamic militants, Taliban and regular army personnel . India accuses Pakistan of attacking its troops .
 Indian bombardment targeted not only the Kargil Heights on the Indian side of the Line of Control . The alleged supply bases on the Pakistan side were also targeted .
 Pakistan's foreign minister was sent to New Delhi on 12 June for diplomatic efforts for de-escalation and dialogue . Pakistan has been trying to defuse the situation in New Delhi .
 India took a rigid, no-negotiation stance on Pakistan withdrawal of personnel from Kargil before discussion on any other issue . India insisted on Pakistani withdrawal of troops before discussion about any other issues .
 Indian foreign minister used the word ‘demand’ three times in one minute . The word 'demand' was used three times during the meeting .
 Concern mounted internationally that the fighting in Kargil might escalate and lead to a general war between Pakistan and India, now declared nuclear states . Meanwhile, concern mounted internationally .
 Only the OIC backed the Pakistani position by asking for de-escalation and dialogue . Pakistan has been accused of using its guns against the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 China did not criticise Pakistan and called on both India and Pakistan to ‘respect the Line of Control’ Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif sued for the United States President’s intercession to defuse the crisis .
 Clinton received Sharif for an emergency meeting on Sunday, 4 July—US Independence Day . Clinton met with Sharif for the emergency meeting for the first time on Sunday .
 Joint statement provided for immediate cessation of hostilities and concrete steps to be taken for the restoration of the Line of Control in accordance with the Shimla Agreement . Pakistan-India dialogue as begun in Lahore in 1999 for resolving all issues dividing India and Pakistan .
 Military officers of Pakistan and India later agreed on steps for disengagement . Military officers later agreed to disengagement with each other . Pakistan, India have been at odds for years over Kashmir issue .
 A U.S. official compared Sharif’s dash to Washington to Yahya Khan's request for United States help in the face of a rapidly deteriorating situation in the 1971 war . A United States official said Sharif's dash was similar to that of Khan's call to the U.
 Henry Kissinger had remarked that the U.S. was asked to be in at the crash-landing when it was not in on the take-off . Pakistan was mercifully spared that biting sarcasm this time, it was partly because all that it asked was the proverbial fig leaf
 Most commentators blamed the Pakistan government for losing sight of strategy in a tactical bid to awaken international attention to the festering Kashmir dispute . Most commentators blame the government for failing to make a strategic move in the region .
 Given the power disparity, a military solution was obviously out of question . The U.S. military has been unable to find a solution to the problem .
 A war that could escalate to the nuclear level was considered inconceivable . A war against North Korea would be inconceivable, experts say .
 Its spokesmen disclaimed knowledge of the Mujahideen operation in Kargil one day and accepted responsibility for their withdrawal the next day . The next day they admitted responsibility for the withdrawal .
 Shallow thinking was manifest also in pendulum swings from naive bus diplomacy to Kargil gamble . The gamble was made in a bid to win back the Kargils vote .
 Politics of corruption and crass calculation of immediate political advantage was diagnosed as the main reason for the shallow and myopic policies of the ruling families . The absence of long-term thinking and institutional decision-making was also diagnosed .
 Autopsies of the Kargil crisis by Pakistani commentators underlined agonising dilemmas that Pakistan faced in regard to Kashmir issue . Autopsy of the crisis highlighted agonising dilemma faced by Pakistan over Kashmir issue, says Pakistani commentators .
 If it did not act, India claimed to have achieved a final solution; if it did, it incurred the risk of war . If it didn't act, it would have caused a further crisis in the region .
 Misconceived policies and actions not only isolated Pakistan internationally, they also gravely damaged the heroic freedom struggle of the Kashmiri people . Pakistan has isolated itself internationally and gravely harmed Kashmiri freedom struggle, writes Shah .
 Focus shifted from indigenous agitation for self-determination to Indian allegations of its Pakistani sponsorship, from inhuman Indian excesses in Kashmir to restraint in limiting response to its side of the Line of Control, from brutality of Indian forces against the Kashmiri people to bravery .
 If the Kargil episode exposed Pakistan to international censure it also opened a breach between the prime minister and the Army hierarchy . The episode also opened the breach between Pakistan and the army hierarchy .
 Nawaz Sharif was reported to have blamed the army for keeping him ignorant of the plan for the Kargil operation . He blamed army for not telling him about the operation .
 Musharraf was on his way back from a visit to Sri Lanka when he was dismissed . Sharif ordered refusal of landing facilities to the PIA airliner on which he was a passenger . A few months later Sharif dismissed Chief of Army Staff General Pervez Mushrraf .
 Musharraf refused to be diverted to another destination . Karachi corps commander intervened to save the passengers and crew . The plane ran low on fuel as the plane ran out .
 On return, the chief of staff took over the government in a bloodless coup . On return he took control of the government with the help of his staff .
 A decision was taken to stabilise the debt burden, which had grown by $3 billion a year during the 1990s to $38 billion . Foreign aid was cut off, exports were stagnant at $8 billion and remittances had declined . The debt-servicing burden of over
 None of the ministers in the 16 member cabinet asked for replacement of old cars . None of them asked for new cars to be replaced with new ones .
 Priority attention was given to accountability and recovery of defaulted loans . Priority attention to accountability given to those who defaulted on loans, officials said .
 By the end of June 2001, efforts had yielded a measure of success . Exports increased by 10 per cent growth, tax revenues increased .
 Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji visited Pakistan in 2001 and announced cooperation in the construction of Gwadar port . Premier visited Pakistan to announce cooperation in building the port .
 Sultan Qaboos of Oman visited Pakistan in April 2001 and extended substantial assistance for economic development . Oman took a 50 per cent share in a joint investment fund with Pakistan .
 The government’s performance persuaded some countries to review sanctions . Also, the government's performance prompted some nations to review some sanctions .
 Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori paid an official visit to Pakistan . He announced resumption of suspended aid for development projects . Mori invited the foreign minister to visit Tokyo .
 The United States appreciated Pakistan’s assistance for confidential contacts with the Taliban . The U.S. thanked Pakistan for its assistance for its contacts with Taliban .
 President Clinton did not omit Islamabad during his tour of South Asia . President Clinton visited the capital during his South Asia tour .
 The IMF agreed to provide a loan for balance-of-payments support to Pakistan . The United States used its influence for containment of PakistanIndia tension and its officials made a valuable contribution .
 Commonwealth suspended Pakistan's membership but maintained contacts with Pakistan . Pakistan is now a member of the Commonwealth but has maintained contacts .
 A Commonwealth ministerial action group delegation was the first to visit Pakistan in October 1999 to meet with the new leadership, if only to encourage them to move towards the restoration of democracy .
 Reform of laws in countries like the UK, Switzerland and Luxembourg would help address the root cause of political instability in developing countries like Pakistan . More than lectures on democracy, reform of these laws is needed to address the problem .
 Despite UN and World Bank recognition of the problem of corruption, progress towards rectification of bank secrecy laws remained meagre . The adoption of an international convention on cooperation against corruption in 2004 was adopted .
 On New Years Day, 2001, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee wrote an article highlighting the need for India to address two outstanding issues, namely, Kashmir and the Babri Mosque .
 He suggested a meeting with the Pakistani president to discuss Kashmir .
 The two leaders will meet at Agra on 15 and 16 July . After a delay of nearly four months, he sent an invitation for the meeting .
 They recognised the need to transform the 50-year-old confrontation into good neighbourly cooperation . They recognise the need for transforming the confrontation into cooperation .
 President Musharraf urged earnest efforts to resolve the Kashmir dispute . President Mushrraf: "To that end, I am happy to see progress in Kashmir."
 Around noon on 16 July they called in the foreign ministers and informed them of the understanding they had reached to resume dialogue . This should be the basis of a declaration to be issued later that day .
 The two ministers agreed on a declaration text to be recommended to leaders . Working on draft 12 already prepared by foreign secretaries .
 The draft was considered in the Indian cabinet committee on political affairs . On the Indian side, the draft was discussed in the cabinet committee .
 External Affairs Minister Jaswant Singh sought a meeting with his Pakistani counterpart at 6m. to discuss an amendment to the oneline paragraph on Kashmir . The meeting lasted over two hours .
 At about 9m. the Pakistan side was informed that the agreement would not be signed . The Pakistan team was told they could not sign the agreement . The agreement had been due to be signed by the Pakistan team .
 The summit ended on an anticlimactic note to the surprise of the media people and the disappointment and frustration of the Pakistan delegation . The summit was held in a blaze of global multimedia coverage, the summit ended .
 The Pakistani president was told by the Indian prime minister that it had not been possible to reach agreement in the cabinet committee . Before departing Agra for Islamabad, the prime minister told the Pakistani president that it was not possible .
 He did not explain what the disagreement was about, adding only that ‘the time was not favourable’ and that he would visit Pakistan later to finalise the proposed agreement . He said he would travel to Pakistan later in the hope of finalising the agreement .
 A spokesperson of the ministry of external affairs said, 'No agreement was reached'
 Observers speculate about what had prevented agreement at the summit . The summit was supposed to be the first of its kind .
 The videotape of the question-answer meeting telecast by an Indian commercial channel projected Musharraf’s persuasive views on the need to address the Kashmir dispute to a spellbound audience in both countries .
 The Indian side was said to be angry that he had stolen a march over the Indian prime minister . The Indian team is said to have been angered by the incident .
 Hours after the telecast the Indian side had not raised the issue with the Pakistan side, and even agreed to finalise the draft of the declaration . The Indian side did not raise the issue after the Pakistan team agreed to discuss the draft .
 Pakistani presidents reference to Kashmir as the principal obstacle to normalisation of Pakistan-Indian relations was no more than a statement of the obvious . As for Kashmir as a principal obstacle, that was no matter more than the obvious, it was just a statement .
 Normalisation has seldom taken place between pairs of countries with serious disputes and differences . Quite apart from the experience of Pakistan and India, normalisation has rarely taken place .
 Recent examples of the causal link include the Portugal and Indonesia, over East Timor, lapan and Russia over the Northern Islands, and USA and Cuba over ideological differences .
 This was factually incorrect, as the text of the draft declaration confirms . The draft declaration was published in a draft text .
 The draft provided for dialogue on all issues of concern to both sides, including terrorism . The draft provides for dialogue for both sides to discuss .
 More interesting was the question as to who in the Indian cabinet committee had objected to the draft . The draft was drafted by a cabinet committee in India . It is not known who objected to it .
 President Musharraf publicly blamed Advani for the failure of the summit four years later . Advani was the prime minister of Pakistan in the 1990s .
 General Musharraf had only made out a case for the resolution of the Kashmir dispute, which most guests appeared to find logical . Most guests seemed to find his case logical .
 Kashmir and terrorism are included among subjects for sustained dialogue at the political level in paragraph 3 of the agreed draft . Otherwise, both Kashmir and terrorist terrorism were included in the draft . Kashmir is a major source of tension between Kashmir and Pakistan in Kashmir .
 Considering that Vajpayee had conceived and canvassed the initiative for dialogue with Pakistan on Kashmir, he was probably disappointed by the outcome . It can be assumed that he was sincere in his intention to visit Pakistan at a more favourable time .
 It would have been better for the fulfilment of his ambition to improve relations with Pakistan had he asserted leadership to persuade one or more members of the cabinet committee who vetoed the declaration .
 Another opportunity to change the course of Pakistan-India relations was missed as one more agreement fell victim to internal political battles . Pakistan and India have been at odds with each other for years .
 Cabinet Minister NaseeruUah Babar made this factually incorrect remark . The Taliban helped rescue a convoy of Pakistani trucks held up by Afghan warlords .
 Transparency International's report is said to be based on surveys of business houses, etc. etc. Transparency International says it is based on survey of businesses .
 We regard any military action to change the status quo as irresponsible . We regard the military action as irresponsible. We regard it as 'irresponsible'
 Undersecretary of State Thomas Pickering played a key role on contacts with Islamabad . Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott was in contact with New Delhi .
 Members of the Committee, chaired by the Prime Minister, were Ministers of Commerce, Defence, External Affairs, Finance, and Home Affairs . The committee was formed by ministers of Commerce and Defence .
 External Affairs Minister of India laswant Singh was in charge of India's foreign policy . Singh was the prime minister of India in 2001 .
 The commitment was sanctified in resolutions adopted by the UN Security Council in 1948 and 1949 . The two countries agreed, for instance, that the question of the accession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir would be decided through the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite
 India gave the resolutions unilateral interpretations and came up with novel explanations to renege on its obligation . Later, India gave itself a novel explanation .
 The Shimla Agreement and the Lahore Declaration suffered a similar fate . The Lahore Agreement and Shimla Declaration suffered from similar fate. The Lahores Declaration was signed in 1998 .
 The terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on 11 September 2001 triggered a transformation of world politics as profound and far-reaching as the attacks on 9/11 . Chapter 19 Post-9/11 Policy: The U.S. government's response to the terrorist attacks was
 More than three thousand people were killed and material losses amounted to a hundred billion dollars or more . Material losses amount to more than 100 billion dollars . More than 3,000 people died, material losses are estimated at more than three billion dollars a year .
 The unprecedented and never-imagined assault on the U.S. mainland was more destructive than the attack on Pearl Harbour in 1941 . The unprecedented assault was more devastating than the Pearl Harbour attack .
 The American nation was it traumatized and seethed with rage and urge for revenge . The U.S. was traumatized by the Vietnam War .
 President George W Bush articulated a fierce resolve to hunt down culprits responsible for planning and organising the terrorist outrage . George W. Bush said he was determined to find those responsible for the terrorist atrocity .
 All condemned the attack, and expressed condolences and solidarity with the U.S. people . The attack occurred in New York City .
 The president of Pakistan issued a strong statement of condemnation and sympathy . Pakistan's prime minister issued a statement of support for the family .
 He affirmed Pakistan’s readiness to join the U.S. in the fight against terrorism . Also said Pakistan is ready to join with the United States in the battle against terrorism.
 The United States media instantly pointed a finger of accusation at Osama bin Laden, naming him as the mastermind behind the terrorist attacks . A sense of crisis and foreboding dominated the air in Islamabad after the attacks .
 Pakistan bound to face painful choices in the days ahead . Pakistan is the sole supporter of the Taliban . Pakistan's geographical location and being the sole support for the Taliban is bound to be painful .
 Until then there had been no contact or communication between the governments of Pakistan and the U.S. Until then, there was no contact .
 It was not difficult to surmise that the U.S. would take military action against the Taliban . The Taliban is believed to be a major threat in Afghanistan .
 Two years earlier, the U.S. had fired missiles from ships at sea to bomb suspected terrorist camps in Afghanistan, without asking Pakistan for permission to fly over its territory .
 It was presumable that the U.S. would react with even greater force now . It was presumed that the United States would react to the situation now .
 The question required anticipation and consideration of Pakistan’s options . Pakistan has a history of terrorism, terrorism and terrorism .
 Pakistan had to avoid opposition to U.S. policy, and a refusal to cooperate would not only be ineffectual, but might also provoke United States hostility . Pakistan must evolve a strategy of approach, keeping in the forefront both the national interest and the need for a realistic assessment of
 It was assumed that major powers would extend cooperation to the United States in punishing terrorists . The U.S. was expected to work with the world's major powers to punish terrorists .
 None would oppose a likely U.S. decision to mount an attack against the Taliban . None of the Taliban leaders would oppose an attack on the Taliban.
 No proof would be asked, or considered necessary, of Taliban complicity with bin Laden . No proof of bin Laden's involvement with the Taliban would be considered necessary .
 The Taliban provided bin Laden with sanctuary and a base for terrorist activities . Already, the Security Council had condemned and imposed sanctions on the Taliban precisely because of the Taliban .
 In the new, more grave circumstances, the Security Council would be even more sympathetic to the U.S. The United States would be sympathetic to its ally in Syria, a former diplomat says .
 Arab countries and Central Asian neighbours of Afghanistan would probably agree to allow use of landing facilities for U.S. aircraft . Some of the major powers might even join in the attack, and some of the Arab countries might even agree .
 India, already canvassing Indo-US cooperation against terrorism, was likely to provide assistance . India is already campaigning for cooperation with the U.S. against terrorism .
 The Security Council resolution of December 2000 had imposed sanctions against the Taliban under Chapter VII requiring compulsory compliance . The sanctions were imposed by the UN in December 2000 .
 Pakistan had cooperated with Taliban by closing Taliban-controlled banks and curtailing official contacts . Pakistan had closed Taliban-run banks, curtailed official contacts with Taliban . Taliban had been operating under Taliban rule .
 In the graver situation now, a defiant policy course was out of the question . The U.S. has been in the throes of a major crisis in the world .
 Pakistan’s vital interests would be in jeopardy if India was given a free hand against Pakistan . India's vital interests are in jeopardy, says Pakistan's ambassador . Pakistan has a long history of anti-Pakistan sentiments .
 Kashmiri freedom struggle might be labelled as a terrorist insurgency . Kashmir's freedom struggle may also be labelled terrorist insurgency, says Kashmiri activist .
 Azad Kashmir and Pakistan territory could be attacked under the pretext of eliminating terrorist bases, says Pakistanis . Azad Kashar Kareya and Pakistan could be attacked under the pretext of eliminating terrorist bases .
 It was known that in the 1980s, India had pondered an attack on Kahuta .
 It might again entertain thoughts of targeting Pakistan’s nuclear assets . It might . again entertain . thoughts of . targeting Pakistan's nuclear . assets .
 Pakistan had to pursue a strategy that would reduce risks to Pakistan’s own security and strategic interests . Pakistan has to pursue strategy that reduces risks to its own security, says Shah .
 It had to steer clear clear of defiance and avoid offence to the United States . The U.S. government had to avoid offending .
 The question was not whether Pakistan could exploit its strategic location for economic or political benefits from the U.S. The weightier and decisive factor was the predictable cost of non-cooperation . Pakistan has a long history of not cooperating with the United States .
 Long-term considerations and cultural and geographical bonds with Afghanistan precluded any actions that might offend the interests or sensibilities of the Afghan people . At the same time, long term considerations .
 The crisis called for a policy that balanced global and regional constraints, immediate imperatives and long-term interests, national priorities and the norms of an international order based on principles of international law .
 Cautious cooperation in a UN-approved action against the Taliban emerged as the only feasible alternative . U.N.-approved action was the only viable alternative to the Taliban .
 Pakistan should not and should not oppose U.S. attacks on targets in Afghanistan, writes Ravi Agrawal . Pakistan should indicate a generally positive disposition and negotiate details later, he says .
 Pakistan could then seek modification of U.S. policy and its expectations of Pakistan . It could then also seek modifications of United States policy and expectations .
 Pakistan’s strategy was decided, in broad outline, on the evening of 12 September—still forenoon in Washington, in Washington . It should be noted that it was decided on the basis of objective analysis and anticipation of the likely course of events .
 Public statements by President Bush and administration officials on 12 September were heard in Islamabad either late that night or on 13 September . Due to the time difference with Washington, the statements were heard later that night .
 The Security Council and the General Assembly adopted unanimous resolutions condemning the terrorist outrage on 12 September . They extended condolences to the United States, extending condolences to U.S.
 Canada, UK, Germany, France, Denmark and Denmark offered military contingents for a coalition force to attack the Taliban . Canada, the UK, and the UK are among the countries offering military support for the coalition .
 Turkey and the states of Central and South Asia, including India, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka indicated willingness to provide logistic facilities, as did several Arab countries . Several Arab countries expressed willingness to help provide logistically .
 The contours of U.S. policy began to emerge soon after the war began .
 President Bush said those who harboured terrorists would be treated as terrorists . Bush: Those who harbour terrorists will be treated like terrorists . President Bush made the announcement on 13 September .
 U.S. records that became available three years later confirmed the apprehensions Pakistan had anticipated . United States records that were released three years after the war .
 Islamabad was in a position to give a prompt and generally positive response to the U.S. request . The United States request was received, with details on some points to be worked out later .
 The impression that Pakistan had ‘totally’ acquiesced in U.S. ‘demands was incorrect,’ it was incorrect . The impression was that Pakistan acquiesced to the U.K. 'demands’
 Pakistan had already condemned terrorist attacks, and it had not provided logistic access to bin Laden . Pakistan has already condemned the terrorist attacks .
 Some misguided imams in border areas had encouraged youths to go to Afghanistan to fight on the side of the Taliban . This was never approved or encouraged by the government . Some imams had encouraged simple youths to fight for the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 Diplomatic relations with the Taliban were to be cut off only if bin Laden was implicated and the Taliban still continued to harbour him . Diplomatic ties were only to be severed if he was implicated in the case .
 The extent of logistic support to the U.S. forces was to be worked out, as was territorial access . The U.N. mission was to work out how long it would provide logistic and territorial support .
 U.S. war operations were conducted from naval ships or distant bases, not from Pakistan territory . However, United States war operations in Pakistan were conducted by naval ships .
 Pakistan did not participate in United States military action in Afghanistan . Pakistan has not participated in any of the U.S. military operations .
 Over a period of about two weeks, the president held lengthy and interactive discussions with a dozen groups of prominent people from various walks of national life . Leaders of political parties, the intelligentsia, media luminaries, ulema and mashaikh .
 He gave them a candid analysis of the costs and benefits of the policy options . He said he gave them an analysis of costs and the benefits .
 They were realistic in their assessment of the gravity of the situation and the need for circumspection, they said . They said they were realistic about the need to circumspect .
 A majority of Pakistanis opposed cooperation with the US . They argued that right was on the side of the Taliban, and therefore, religious duty required Pakistan to support them, regardless of costs .
 Other religious scholars put forward convincing refutation by citing instances from early Islamic history, showing that a leader had to take into account the countervailing circumstances in specific situations .
 After the US-led coalition attacked Afghanistan on 6 October, Pakistani religious parties called for demonstrations . Pakistan's religious parties have called for protests against the coalition .
 The public doubted the wisdom of protest, and participation was limited to a narrow section of opinion . Assessing the situation intelligently, the public doubted protest, writes CNN.com's John Defterios .
 Islam disapproves and abhors the killing of even a single innocent person, says Islam . The Muslim world disapproves of even killing even an innocent person .
 Demonstrators are no longer taking part in street demonstrations . Demonstrations have been declining in recent months . The number of people who participated in the demonstrations has declined .
 The United States and the West applauded the Pakistan government for enlightened leadership, and manifested their solidarity by visits to Pakistan . The West applauded Pakistan's enlightened leadership and manifested solidarity by visiting Pakistan .
 Never before had so many leaders come to Pakistan as in the months after September, one on the heels of the other and sometimes on the same day . Pakistanis have seen a surge in foreign leaders in recent months .
 President of Turkey, prime minister of Lebanon, foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Iran, Turkey, and Oman come on visits . Also the president of Turkey and prime ministers of Lebanon came on visits to Saudi Arabia .
 Other dignitaries included the UN Secretary General, UNDP Administrator, UNHCR, UNHCR and UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, OIC secretary general and a number of special envoys .
 Islamabad did not bargain for a quid pro quo, but it was not unmindful of the value and importance of its contribution to the fight against terrorism . Pakistan’s entitlement to reciprocity by the United States and other Western countries .
 It made known its expectation of the termination of the so-called non-proliferation and democracy sanctions, and the resumption of support and assistance, it said .
 They evinced understanding of Pakistan’s hardships on account of past mismanagement and corruption, the rise of international debt and loss in exports due to the destabilising effect of the military action in Afghanistan . The response became progressively more forthcoming .
 The United States, the European Union and Japan dismantled nuclear and democracy sanctions and resumed assistance to Pakistan . Appreciating Pakistan’s key role as a ‘frontline State’ in the war on terrorism, the U.S. and the EU dismantled sanctions on Pakistan .
 Individually or collectively they agreed to write off or reschedule the debt . The debt is estimated at $1.2 billion . The bill is expected to reach $1 billion .
 The Ackerman amendment in 2004 waived the nuclear sanctions for five years . The amendment was passed by Congress in 2004 .
 The United States President issued a waiver to allow resumption of economic assistance and military sales . The U.S. President issued the waiver . The waiver was lifted by President Barack Obama .
 The U.S. agreed to write off a part of Pakistan’s debt and immediately provided $600 million as economic aid . $177 million as military and security assistance for 2002 .
 In 2003, the United States agreed to provide $3 billion over five years in economic and military assistance . The U.S. agreed to the aid package in 2003 .
 Bush administration extended low-interest credits for the purchase of airliners for PIA . Pakistan agreed to sell C-130 transport planes, a P-3 Orion marine surveillance aircraft, TOW anti-tank missiles, and other equipment for defence valued at $1.1 billion .
 In March 2005, the U.S. decided to sell F-16 aircrafts to Pakistan . The United States further decided in March 2005 to sell the aircrafts . Pakistan has been a major source of intelligence from the United States .
 Over the period 2001-07, total transfers from the United States to Pakistan amounted to $7,135 million . $2,335 million in military assistance, budgetary support, development assistance, earthquake relief, and $4,800 million in reimbursement of expenditures .
 The European Union reflects its appreciation of Pakistan’s policy in its decisions regarding economic assistance and market access . The EU reflected its appreciation in its decision to provide economic assistance to Pakistan .
 Its stance on Kashmir reflected recognition of the root cause of the protracted agitation and violence in the disputed state . Also recognition of Kashmir's protracted agitation was also recognition of its root cause .
 Japan had neither exaggerated Pakistan’s capacity to influence the Taliban nor adopted a hard stance toward Pakistan after nuclear tests in May 1998 . Not misled by false assumptions, Japan had not exaggerated Pakistan's capacity for influence, says author .
 Yoshiro Mori was the only Western leader, apart from Clinton, to visit Pakistan between October 1999 and September 2001 . Mori visited Pakistan between 1999 and 2001 . He was the last Western leader to visit the country .
 After 9/11, Japan welcomed the change in Afghanistan and appreciated Pakistan’s cooperation against terrorism . Japan, like most Western countries, welcomed the changes .
 Pakistan decided to provide $300 million as grant assistance and supported Pakistan’s case in the IMF and the Paris Club . The Pakistanis were given the assistance by the US government . The US government decided to give Pakistan the assistance .
 Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi invited President Musharraf to visit in March 2002, and accorded him a warm reception . Prime Minister Ki-Musharraf's visit was the first of his visit to Japan .
 Japan’s support in the Paris Club for rescheduling bilateral debt brought substantial relief, as with $5 billion Japan was the biggest creditor of Pakistan . Japan was also the biggest creditors of Pakistan in the 1990s .
 Koizumi announced recommencement of official development assistance that had been suspended after Pakistan conducted nuclear tests in 1998 . In April 2005, Koizmi announced recommencesment of the assistance .
 Paris Club reschedule $12 billion in bilateral debt at lower interest rates and extended maturities, reducing burden by 30 per cent . More substantial was long-term relief in debt servicing as a result of the decision .
 The ‘all weather friendship’ between Pakistan and China, and Beijing’s characteristically profound understanding of Islamabad's motivations, had ensured continuity of cooperation between the two countries, despite Islamabad's support for the Taliban .
 China's reaction to Pakistan’s decision to join the US-led war on terrorism after 9/11 was mature . Equally mature was the reaction to the arrival of USled forces in Afghanistan close to China's border . Pakistan joined the U.S. led the war on
 Pakistan, on its part, took care to keep Beijing informed of the cross services agreement it signed with the United States . Pakistan signed the agreement with the U.S. for logistic facilities for the U .S. military operation in Afghanistan .
 China endorsed the UN-led Bonn process and the installation of a transitional regime in Afghanistan . China has also endorsed the appointment of a new Afghan government .
 China joined efforts to prevent a possible war between Pakistan and India in 2002 . In 2002, China joined the United States and the EU efforts to stop a war between India and Pakistan .
 A Chinese company won the tender for the revival and management of the Saindak copper mine in Baluchistan . The mine is located in the province of the province . A Chinese firm has won the bid to revive the mine .
 Another Chinese company was invited to join Pakistan for development of the Lakhra coalmines in Sindh and for the generation of electric power . Another Chinese firm will also join Pakistan to develop coal mines and power stations .
 During Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz’s visit to China in December 2004, an agreement was signed to expand trade . An agreement was also signed during PM Shauat Aziz's visit to the country in 2004 .
 A credit of $150 million was pledged for the Chashma-II nuclear power plant . The credit was pledged to help build the power plant in the country's capital .
 China's cumulative loans and investments in Pakistan amounted to $4 billion . China’s cumulative loan and investment in Pakistan totaled $4billion . Pakistan is one of the most important economies in the world .
 Wen and Shaukat Aziz signed the Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Good Neighbourly Relations . They pledged mutual support in defence of sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity . Wen and Aziz also signed a treaty of friendship, cooperation and good neighbourliness .
 Twenty-one other agreements were signed to promote closer trade and economic ties . The agreements were also signed to deepen mutually beneficial cooperation across the board .
 Joint manufacture of JF17 Thunder fighter aircraft was set to commence during 2005 . Pakistan signed a framework agreement for the construction of four modern frigates by China for an estimated $175 million each .
 Pakistan has historical grievances against the United States for going back on its commitments to Pakistan after achieving its immediate objectives . Pakistan has nourished historical grievances with the U.S.
 It first welcomed alliances with Pakistan in the 1950s but then allowed them to wither in 1960s . It then allowed alliances with the country to wane in the 1960s and again in the 1980s .
 Pakistan’s opposition to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan was admired by the U.S. in the 1980s . But as soon as the Soviet forces withdrew, Washington re-imposed nuclear sanctions against Pakistan in 1990 .
 Washington, too, seemed to have recognised the need to contain the volatility that has characterised its past relations with Pakistan . Washington also seemed to recognise the need for containing the volatility .
 Officials in high places in the Bush administration to entertain doubts about Pakistan’s reliability for sustained support to the U.S. Now, officials in high . places in . high places are now considering doubts about the reliability of sustained support from Pakistan .
 The Chairman of the key House Appropriations Committee, that recommends budgetary allocations for financial assistance, questioned the degree of Pakistan’s cooperation with the US . He said the Pakistani government is cooperating more than ever .
 Deputy Secretary of State Armitage thought Pakistan had agreed to cooperate because it had little choice, implying it might back out . Pakistan has been accused of not cooperating with the U.S. in the past .
 Pakistanians place great emphasis on sincerity, as much in inter-state relations, as interpersonal ones . Pakistan's culture invests dosti with characteristics of ishq, and expects a friend to be constant, faithful, selfless and sacrificing .
 Only those with knowledge of international relations recognise that such an expectation ignores history . Only those who know history will be able to predict the outcome of the world's most recent crisis .
 Russia's foreign policy is the guiding factor in foreign policy, says President Vladimir Putin . The country's strategic and economic interests are the guiding force behind foreign policy .
 British statesman’s adage ‘We have permanent interests but not permanent friends’ is only partly correct, for interests, too, are subject to change with evolution of the environment . Friends are always an asset, especially in adversity .
 A transition of understanding took place in Washington after 9/11, the nation's largest city of Washington, DC .
 It was realised that the sudden termination of support for Pakistan in 1990, and U.S. neglect of Afghanistan after the Soviet withdrawal, had been a flawed policy .
 Washington’* termination of cooperation with Afghan leaders made them insensitive to its protests about the presence of foreigners hostile to the U.S. The U.N. says it is ‘insensitive’ to Afghan leaders’s protests .
 Pakistan’s limited capacity to influence the Taliban was undermined as a result of U.S. sanctions and aid cut off . The Taliban was weakened by the United States sanctions . Pakistan has been accused of failing to help the Taliban in Afghanistan .
 An objective appraisal of the prevailing situation in the region called for a long-term policy and sustained attention on the part of the sole superpower .
 After 9/11, U.S. spokespersons sought to assure the nations in the region of the durability of their country’s new policy, emphasising especially the continuity of United States cooperation with Pakistan .
 Pakistan enjoyed ‘broad-based and solid support' in the United States, he said . He noted that Pakistan enjoyed broad-based support’ in the U.S. He said Pakistan enjoyed 'broad--based' and 'solid' support .
 The fall of the Taliban lifted the shadow on Pakistan’s relations with Iran . Pakistan has been in talks with Iran since 2001 .
 Both countries welcomed the installation of a consensus government in Afghanistan . Both countries welcome the new government .
 Islamabad kept Tehran informed of the limited logistical facilities it provided for the coalition forces . The United States has long been hostile to Iran since the overthrow of the Shahanshah .
 The dominant position acquired by the Western countries in Afghanistan had the effect of eliminating Pakistan-Iran rivalry for influence in Afghanistan . Western countries acquired the position of dominant position in Afghanistan in the 1980s .
 Improvement of relations began in 2000 after Pakistan agreed to facilitate the construction of a pipeline for the supply of natural gas from Iran to India . The pipeline will be used to supply natural gas to India from Iran .
 After a gap of many years, the President of Iran paid a visit to Pakistan in 2003 . The President of Pakistan visited Iran in 2003 after a decade of diplomatic relations .
 Arab, Central Asian and other foreign countries appreciated the measures taken by Pakistan to extradite or expel their nationals who abused their stay in Pakistan for militant and subversive activities against their own countries .
 Muslim as well as other states applauded Pakistan’s ban on militant and extremist organisations . Pakistan has been criticised for its anti-extremist policies .
 Not only Taliban fighters, but also many foreign volunteers were killed, wounded or taken prisoner . Taliban fighters were killed and taken prisoner in Afghanistan .
 Pakistanis were misled by religious preachers into joining the self-proclaimed jihad . They included some thousands of Pakistanis who were misled into joining .
 A large number of innocent civilians became casualties of the war . Also, a very large number were killed in the conflict .
 Pakistan cooperated with the world community for an end to civil war, promotion of peace and reconciliation among the different ethnic communities, and political stability .
 The U.N. sought consultations with Pakistan on the formation of a balanced multi-ethnic government . The United Nations and major coalition partners sought consultations .
 Pakistan and Saudi Arabia prepared a joint working paper, recommending a three-pronged political, military and economic strategy for the promotion of reconciliation, unity and cooperation among Afghans . The paper also recommended a fair and equitable sharing of power among different ethnic communities, and reconstruction .
 Foreign Minister Saud Al Faisal presented the paper to the leaders of the United States and Britain . The paper was presented to the U.S. and British leaders .
 Pakistan's information and suggestions that Pakistan shared with others, were perhaps of some value . Fair and objective, Pakistan shared its information with the world .
 The Security Council resolution of 14 November 2001, the Bonn Agreement of 5 December, and over four billion dollars for the reconstruction of Afghanistan by donors at the Tokyo meeting in December 2001 opened the door to a better future for the Afghan nation .
 A silver lining appeared on Afghanistan’s horizon that had long been dominated by the dark clouds of foreign intervention and civil war . The Taliban's rise in Afghanistan has long been overshadowed by foreign intervention .
 The shadow of divisive and obscurantist ideological politics was lifted and the nation could now hope for reconstruction and unity .
 UN-chaired Bonn conference of prominent Afghans endorsed multi-phase formula . Multi-lingual Pushtoon leader, Hamid Karzai as chairman of the interim government .
 The interim authority combined cultural authenticity with commitment to a democratic future for all Afghans, says Afghan President Hamid Karzai . "The interim authority combines cultural authenticity and commitment to the democratic future"
 Chairman-designate Hamid Karzai appreciated Pakistan’s prompt recognition and its decision to send a delegation led by the foreign minister to participate in the installation ceremony .
 Members of the administration, Pushtoon as well as non-Pushtoon, greeted the delegation warmly . The delegation was greeted warmly by members from the Northern Alliance .
 Pakistani guests express gratitude for Pakistan’s role in the liberation of their country . They joined the Pakistani guests in looking to a future of cooperation between the two countries bound by ties of geography, history and culture .
 The Tokyo meeting of donors agreed to a multi-year aid package for reconstruction of the ruined economy of Afghanistan . Donors also agreed to provide a long-term aid package to Afghanistan's ruined economy .
 Pakistan pledged $100 million, out of which an amount of $10 million was paid in cash to enable the new administration to meet urgent needs . Pakistan pledged a total of $20 million to the new government .
 President Hamid Karzai’s decision to include Pakistan among the countries he visited soon after assuming his office . President of Pakistan's return visit to Kabul on 2 April 2002 illustrated the desire of both sides to reconstruct close friendly relations between the two countries .
 Pakistan’s policy of strong support for the peace, unity and territorial integrity of Afghanistan, strict non-interference in its internal affairs, expansion of the international security assistance force, and advocacy of international assistance for reconstruction of Afghanistan helped to restore mutual confidence and goodwill .
 The rise of Afghanistan from the ashes of a protracted war was a blessing for its neighbours, especially the people of Pakistan . Pakistan look forward to the revival of links across their borders, trade and the construction of pipelines for gas and oil .
 An emergency loya jirga held in 2002 approved the composition of the interim government . The loya was formed by a group of emergency loyahs .
 Another jirga in 2003 reached a consensus on the constitution of the Transitional Islamic State of Afghanistan . In 2003, the jirgga reached consensus on a constitution for the TISIS .
 In November 2004, Chairman Hamid Karzai became the first-ever popularly elected president in the history of his country . Chairman Karzai received 55.5% of the vote in 2004 .
 The high voter turnout and absence of Taliban remnants lent credibility to the result . The high turnout, absence of disruption by Taliban remnants, and the orderly conduct of the ballot by the electoral management body, lent credibility .
 Younus Qanuni with the next highest vote , who received the bulk of his votes from the Panjshir province . Abdul Rashid Dostum from the Uzbeks and Haji Mohammad Mohaqqeq from the Hazaras, gracefully accepted the election
 Elections held in September 2005 provided political representation to all ethnic and sectarian components of the population in the parliament which would exercise a check on the relatively strong presidency . Elections were held in 2005 .
 Improvements in internal security and the world community created conditions conducive to the return of a significant number of refugees in Pakistan . The world community provided substantial assistance to the refugees .
 Political stability, establishment of law and order in Afghanistan will be crucial to Afghanistan's stability . The Taliban's fall has magnified since the fall of the Taliban . Afghanistan has been plagued by narcotics production and trafficking problems .
 Trade and transit between Pakistan and the Central Asian Republics will open up for the expansion of trade and transit .
 Whether the U.S. request reached Islamabad on 13 or 14 September is unclear . Whether the United States request reached Pakistan is unclear whether it did .
 Armitage made the requests on 13 September—e.e. already 14 September in Islamabad . The requests were made already in Islamabad, Pakistan, before the deadline .
 The United States embassy cable reported that Musharraf said the GOP was making substantial concessions on allowing use of its territory and that he would pay a domestic price . ‘Musharraf’s comments were made in the U.S. embassy cable .
 Prime Minister of UK, Tony Blair, Wim Kok, Gerhard Schroeder; and Guy Verhofstadt . Prime Ministers of Netherlands and Belgium, Guy Kok and Gerhard Verhofstad .
 Ishrat Hussain is the former Governor of State Bank . Hussain was the head of the State Bank in charge of the country's largest bank . Hussain is also a former President of the United States .
 Jim Kolby, Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, referred to ‘disturbing’ reports that Pakistan had ‘balked 1 at the United States request for its forces to go into its border areas, released the extremists arrested after the presidents 12 lanuary ban on
 Pakistan thrust to frontline role in dealing with a crisis in Afghanistan . Once again Pakistan was thrust to a frontline role .
 Pakistan joined the world community not merely to condemn the terrorist attacks, but also to extend cooperation to the United States . Pakistan concluded that it was imperative for Pakistan to join the U.S. to join its condemnation of terrorist attacks .
 Islamabad decided to avoid direct participation in the invasion of Afghanistan . At the same time Islamabad decided not to participate in the Afghan invasion .
 The demands that Washington made and Islamabad accepted on 13 September, required Pakistan to allow over-flights and the transit of United States and allied forces to stop al Qaeda at its border and prevent recruits from Pakistan going to Afghanistan .
 These undertakings were consistent with the principles of international law, which require a state to prevent abuse of its territory for hostile operations against another state .
 Opinion leaders consulted by General Musharraf in the following days, excepting a majority from religious parties, endorsed the decision . Opinion leaders agreed to the decision, but not religious parties agreed to it .
 The policy was maintained even after political parties were critical of Gen. Gen. David Cameron's actions .
 Compliance with the obligation to seal the border between Pakistan and Afghanistan, however, proved more problematic than was anticipated by Islamabad or Washington . Islamabad and Washington have been unable to agree on the border .
 Pakistan did not maintain requisite military capacity on the border, the U.S. did not bring adequate forces to Afghanistan to prevent the escape of Al Qaeda and Taliban cadres . The United States failed to bring sufficient forces to the border with Pakistan, the Taliban and Al Qaeda cadres escape
 The task is even more complex on the Pakistan side because of the autonomy of the Frontier and Tribal Areas . The task will be even more complicated on the Pakistani side . It is not the first time the Pakistan government has dealt with the issue .
 Access roads are few and government personnel travel only along routes agreed on with tribes . Access roads to the area are few, and government officials travel only on agreed routes .
 Smugglers and outlaws notoriously exploit the absence of law enforcement administration to evade arrest . Smuggglers often exploit absence of police administration to avoid arrest .
 Al Qaeda and a large number of the Taliban fled to hideouts in the border region with which they were already familiar, having used it in the 1980s as a base for operations against the Soviet forces in Afghanistan . After the U.S. and allied forces invaded Afghanistan, Al Qaeda
 The Pushtoon people, with a tradition of hospitality, could be counted upon for protection and support . Pushtoons have sympathy for the Taliban regime, which they support .
 After the U.S. invasion of Afghanistan in October 2001, Pakistan moved a substantial number of troops to the border in order to stop the influx of Al Qaeda and the Taliban . After the United States invaded Afghanistan, Pakistan began moving troops to stop an influx of terrorists .
 Over a thousand terrorists were killed or captured . Hundreds of suspects were transferred to U.S. authorities . Over 1,000 terrorists were captured or killed .
 Domestic criticism of the post-9/11 policy increased because popular opinion saw Pakistan to be fighting Americas war . Domestic criticism increased because of the perception that Pakistan was fighting war .
 President Musharraf became unpopular due to his manipulation of domestic politics for personal ends . Also, he became unpopular because he manipulently manipulated domestic politics . The former Pakistani president became unpopular in 2008 .
 During his visit to Pakistan in March 2006, President Bush agreed to develop a ‘strategic partnership’ with Pakistan .
 Congressional delegations lauded Pakistan’s contribution and sacrifices in the fight against terrorism . Congressmen pledged continuity of support for the strategic partnership between the two countries .
 Neither the United States nor Pakistan succeeded to liquidate the terrorists . However, neither the U.S. or Pakistan succeeded .
 Complications arose largely because the U.S. and its allies did not bring adequate forces to Afghanistan . Complications arise largely because of the lack of adequate forces in Afghanistan, officials say .
 Washington decided to co-opt Afghan warlords in the fight against the opposition to U.S. invasion . To make up for the deficiency, Washington . Co-opted warlords to make up the deficiency .
 Warlords conducted operations to suit their own political priorities . Associated with the Tajik-dominated Northern Alliance, these warlords were involved .
 They fought Fushtoon Taliban rivals but did not diligently pursue Osama Bin Laden and A1 Qaeda cadres . They did not pursue Bin Laden, who first hid in the mountains in Afghanistan and later escaped to Pakistan .
 The Bush administration's policies continued to alienate the Pushtoon majority in Afghanistan . Tajik-dominated local allies grabbed a disproportionate share in power in Kabul and abused their influence to pack the new defence and police forces .
 Pushtoon majority suffered heavy losses of life and property as a result of U.S. bombardment to quell resistance . ‘Collateral damage’ was invented to camouflage casualties of non-combatant civilians, women and children .
 The Taliban, quiescent since 2001, exploited popular disaffection and staged resurgence . The Taliban has been in touch with the public since 2001 . It has staged a resurgence in Afghanistan .
 Al Qaeda recovered influence because of insensitive U.S. policies that offended the Muslim world . Meanwhile, Al Qaeda, too, recovered influence . Al Qaeda has recovered influence due to the insensitive United States policies, U.N. says .
 President Bush talked of a ‘crusade’, reviving the bitter memories of medieval Christendom’s wars against Muslims in the Holy Land . Despite the fact that all Muslim states condemned the 9/11 terrorist outrage, President George Bush .
 Muslim opinion was outraged because of the distortion of Islam by extremist Christian and Jewish lobbies, leading to the rise of Islamophobia in the U.S. and EU countries . The invasion of Iraq on a trumped up charge and indiscriminate bombardment destroyed bridges, roads and urban infrastructure .
 Illegal techniques of torture were authorized by the Bush administration to coerce confessions from suspects held at Guantanamo Bay, Abu Ghraib and Bagram prisons . Thousands of innocent civilians were killed and millions of Iraqis dislocated .
 U.S. abuse of veto power allowed Israel to unleash terrorist gangs for atrocities against Palestinians, mass expulsions from their homeland and continued occupation and repression in defiance of UN resolutions .
 A1 Qaeda mined the seam of Muslim grievances and exploited Bush administration’s blunders to rebuild strength and resume its agenda of terrorism . A1 Al Qaeda mined a seam of grievances to rebuild its strength .
 The resurgence of Al Qaeda and the Taliban complicated not only American predicament but also Pakistan’s . Al Qaeda, Taliban have complicated the U.S. and Pakistan's situation .
 Pakistani Taliban, already sympathetic to Al Qaeda and Afghan Taliban, advocated resistance to Musharraf’s policy . Pakistani Taliban was already sympathetic with Al Qaeda, Afghan Taliban .
 Terrorist attacks against Pakistani forces and civilians became more frequent in Pakistan . Terrorists attacked Pakistani forces, civilians in Pakistan in the past .
 Too frequently, the U.S. and its Afghan ally asked Pakistan to ‘do more’ ignoring the fact that it was already doing more than they were . Too often, the United States and its . Afghan ally .
 Pakistan disappointed that Washington echoed President Karzai’s criticism of Pakistan for failing to prevent Afghan Taliban from using its territory as a base to organise and launch attacks across the border . Pakistan was disappointed that there were three million Afghan refugees on Pakistan soil and it was difficult to identify the terrorists
 Even some U.S. officials were reported to suspect Pakistan’s ability or willingness to restrain the Taliban . Even some United States officials were said to doubt Pakistan's ability .
 U.S. Ambassador to Kabul, Zalmay Khalilzad, alleged that some areas in Pakistan had become a sanctuary for al Qaeda and the Taliban . U.K. ambassador to Kabul said areas had become sanctuary for the Taliban and al Qaeda .
 Influential American commentators and academics allege elements within Pakistan government were playing a ‘double game’ of openly siding with the U.S. but secretly colluding with the Afghan Taliban .
 The United States started to use Drone missiles in 2004 to target Al Qaeda operatives and their allies in their hideouts in FATA, who mounted attacks across the border . The U.S. started using drones in 2004 .
 Pakistan objected to the violation of its sovereignty . Opinion leaders became highly critical of the U.S. Drone attacks became more frequent and destructive .
 The Government of Pakistan continued to urge reversal of the policy arguing that such attacks were ‘counter-productive’ in terms of popular support for Pakistan-US cooperation . Pakistan continues to urge reverse of the decision .
 U.S. Defence Secretary Robert Gates implied there was an understanding on the issue . The Pakistan Foreign Office promptly denied that the statement was made .
 Islamabad's grievances centred on United States insensitivity to Pakistan's security concerns . One of Islamabad’s grievances is that the U.S. is insensitive to Pakistan’S. security concerns, it said .
 Washington embarked on a policy of expanding strategic collaboration with India in defence, missile and nuclear technology . Despite initial criticism of Indian nuclear tests in 1998, U.S. was embarked on policy of expansion of cooperation .
 Islamabad was particularly aggrieved by the U.S. decision to reverse the policy on transferring civilian nuclease technology to India . Islamabad was especially aggrieved over the decision .
 Washington concluded an agreement with New Delhi in 2008 that would enable India to increase its capacity for diversion of fissile material to build a bigger nuclear arsenal . Disregarding the long-standing ban imposed by the Nuclear Suppliers Group on such transfers to non-parties to the
 A more malignant problem that has blighted trust between Pakistan and the United States has been the recurrent record of unilateral cut-offs of cooperation with Pakistan . The United States is not a reliable friend, leading to the widespread belief that the U.S. is not reliable friend .
 U.S. refusal to come to Pakistan’s assistance in the 1965 and 1971 wars was considered a betrayal that left indelible scars on the Pakistani memory . United States refused to help Pakistan in the two wars .
 Pakistan played a key role in securing the expulsion of Soviet forces from Afghanistan, which contributed to the collapse of the Soviet Union . In 1990, the U.S. suddenly terminated assistance and even sale of arms to Pakistan .
 Respected American statesmen have recognized that Pakistan’s grievances are not unfounded . Respected U.S. statesmen recognize that Pakistan's grievances not unfounded, writes CNN.com senior correspondent .
 Former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger has said that in refusing to come to Pakistan’s assistance in 1971, the U.S. conducted itself ‘like a shyster looking for legitimate loopholes’ to evade the solemn commitments it had made to Pakistan .
 Frequent statements to this effect were made by high officials of the U.S. administrations . Frequent statement was made by the United States administrations .
 A more concrete demonstration of the new policy was the passage in 2003 of a five-year, $3 billion economic and military aid programme .
 The U.S. contributed generously to the 2005 earthquake relief fund and to education, health and poverty reduction programmes .
 Improvement in trust between Pakistan and the U.S. accelerated after the election of President Barack Obama and Vice President Joseph Biden .
 Not since Richard Nixon was the White House as empathetic and as knowledgeable about Pakistan and as sensitive to its concerns, sentiments and needs . Not since Nixon, not since he was the president of the United States .
 President Barack Obama announced a new strategy to deal with the deteriorating situation of Afghanistan and Pakistan in March 2009 . President Obama announced the new strategy on 27 March 2009, as a result of a deteriorating situation in Afghanistan .
 They controlled parts of the territory of the two counties . They used safe-havens in the mountainous terrain along Pakistan’s frontier to hide and train terrorists, plot attacks and plot attacks .
 The new strategy aims to disrupt, dismantle, defeat, and expel Al Qaeda, Obama said . Obama said the new strategy was to prevent the return of Al Qaeda to either country .
 To achieve these goals President Obama emphasized a policy of strengthening Afghanistan and Pakistan . President Obama also emphasized enhancing their military, economic and governance capacity .
 Al Qaeda and militant extremists had killed thousands of Pakistanis, assassinated former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, blown up buildings, frightened away foreign investment, and posed the gravest threat to the stability of the state . Pakistanis were killed by al Qaeda and militants who had killed
 President Obama pledged to work with the World Bank, IMF and other partners for assistance to Pakistan . He pledged to lessen tensions between the two nuclear neighbours in South Asia, support Pakistan’s democracy and development .
 He endorsed the Kerry-Lugar bill for increased long-term assistance to Pakistan' 7 and the bill for Greater Opportunity Zones to bring hope to places plagued by instability .
 President Obama spoke with understanding of Pakistan . President Obama also spoke on other issues of concern to Pakistan .
 Its purposes included support for economic growth and development, improving living standards in Pakistan, including FATA, consolidation of democracy and building sustainable, and long-term and multi-faceted relations with Pakistan .
 Reconciliation between the texts adopted by the two houses was done after the summer recess when the act became law . The act was passed in the summer of 2013 .
 At a meeting held in April 2009, twenty countries including the United States, Japan, Britain, Germany, China, Saudi Arabia, as well as other affluent Arab countries, pledged $5. billion in aid for Pakistan .
 In August they met again in Istanbul and agreed to expedite delivery of funds . In August, they agreed to speed up delivery of the funds .
 Pakistan’s foreign policy had evidently situated it in the mainstream of world opinion at a critical time in its history, when the country was confronted with an existential threat . Pakistan's foreign policy has evidently situated Pakistan in the world's mainstream .
 Opinion in Pakistan turned decisively against the Taliban after terrorist mayhem forced three million people of Swat to flee their homes in May 2009 . Three million people in Swat were forced to flee homes in the wake of the terrorist mayhem .
 Their spokesmen called the state of Pakistan ‘un-Islamic’ and flagrantly flouted its constitution and administrative and judicial system . They said it was flag-flag-flouted and flouted the constitution .
 Pakistan lacks resources to cope with the problem single-handedly, too, it is obvious, too . It was obvious that Pakistan lacked resources to deal with the issue single-handed . Pakistan is not alone in Pakistan, but it has a history of terrorism .
 Remembering the consequences of isolation in 1965, 1971 and 1998-99, it was not difficult to imagine the consequences . The consequences of opting out of the global consensus in the wake of 9/11 are not easy to imagine .
 Joint Statement by President George W Bush and Prime Minister Syed Yousuf Raza Gilani, 28 July 2008 . Joint statement by President Bush and PM Gilani .
 President Musharraf repeated a refrain that he repeated with visiting Congressional delegations . Musharra repeated the refrain in meetings with visiting congressional delegations.
 John Kerry and Chuck Hagel on 2 February 2008, and Senator Joseph Lieberman on 12 January 2009, respectively . John Kerry was joined by Senator Lieberman on 2 January 2008, for the first time .
 For references, see article by Pakistani diplomat Zamir Akram in Criterion Quarterly, Islamabad, of January-March 2009 .
 Nek Mohammad Wazir was one of the top A1 Qaeda operatives in Pakistan . He was also a prominent Pakistani terrorist and A1 al Qaeda operative . Nek Mohammad was a member of the Pakistani Taliban . He is believed to be a key figure in the Taliban .
 Haitham Al Yemeni, Abu Hamza Rabia, Abu Laith Al Libby, Abu Sulaiman Al Jazrri, Midhat Mursi . Midhat Al Yemeni was the first member of the group to join the group .
 Abu Zubair Al-Masri, Usman Al Kinny, Shaikh Ahmed Salim Swedan, Sarkai Naki and Baitullah Mehsud on 5 August . Al- Masri, Al-Kinny, Swedan and Swedan were killed in clashes in
 Islamabad did not press the controversy to the detriment of cooperation with the U.S., apparently aware it lacked the technology to go after the terrorists .
 The problem receded in mid-2009 when mounting terrorist violence within Pakistan turned Pakistani opinion against the U.S. The problem has receded since then when mounting terrorism in Pakistan receded .
 U.S. Under-Secretary of State Nicholas Bum’s statement of 18 November 2006 quoted by Zamir Akram in his article on Pakistan-US Relations in Criterion Quarterly .
 Khan’s proliferation network, Pakistan government removed him and some other senior scientists from their jobs in the enrichment programme . Khan was removed from his job as a scientist in the programme .
 Defence Secretary Robert Gates reiterated on 8 September 2009, ‘security arrangements for the Pakistani nuclear capabilities are sufficient and adequate’ ‘Security arrangements for Pakistan’s nuclear capabilities were ‘sufficient and adequate'
 Institute of Science and International Security on 10 March 2006, quoted by Zamir Akram, quoted as Zamir . Zamir is the author of the book, "Zamir" and "Zakram"
 This figure was mentioned in the draft text of the Kerry-Lugar bill in the United States House of Representatives, June 2009 .
 The idea was initiated in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by Senators Joseph Biden and John Kerry in mid-2008 .
 President Obama said, ‘If we have a high-value target within our sights, after consulting with Pakistan we’re going after them.’ President Obama .
 Pakistan's main thrust has to be help Pakistan defeat these extremists' 19.5 per cent . But our main thrust is to help defeat them' 19 per cent of Pakistanis' 19-year-old extremists .
 Pakistan has been of one voice with the rest of the world community in condemning terrorism, and supporting international cooperation to eradicate terrorism . Chapter 21 Terrorism Pakistan condemned terrorism by eliminating its root causes—alien occupation, state oppression and repression .
 The government enacted laws to ban extremist and militant groups that organised or participated in acts of violence in and outside of the country .
 Pakistan became a frontline state in the ‘war on terrorism’ after 9/11 . Pakistan intensified its pursuit of foreign militants after the attacks .
 Many of them were brought by the CIA to assist the Afghan Mujahideen in their liberation struggle, but continued to reside in the mountainous terrain of the tribal areas . They later participated in the civil war in Afghanistan .
 Members of extremist movements in their countries of origin and terrorists, they were led by Osama bin Laden, they said . Members of terrorist groups led by bin Laden .
 Pakistan procured modern equipment and strengthened the training of police and security personnel to upgrade their capacity for vigilance, investigation of terrorist crimes and bringing perpetrators to justice . Meanwhile, with United States financial assistance, Pakistan procures modern equipment .
 President of Pakistan urged world leaders to promote a just resolution of international issues . Many of these issues had brought protracted suffering to Muslim peoples and generated resentment .
 Negotiations in the UN General Assembly on a comprehensive international convention against terrorism stalled because of disagreements on the definition of terrorism . A group of states resisted the distinction between terrorism and freedom struggle .
 Bhagat Singh was hanged for assassinating a British police officer in 1928, and for throwing a bomb into the colonial Central Assembly building in New Delhi in 1930 . 70 years later the Indian government issued a postage stamp to honour him as a national hero . The Kashmiris who attacked the
 The Universal Human Rights Declaration, two human rights conventions, and covenants on crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide, have not restrained states from suppressing popular protests for freedom and other human rights . The U.N. Human Rights Act was signed by the UN in 1998 .
 Oppressive policies of states against people have historically been a main generator of terrorism . State terrorism has been a major source of terrorism in recent years .
 Palestinians who had lived in that land for centuries were driven out by systematic violence and terror . Palestinians who'd lived there for centuries have been driven out of that land .
 Livingstone noted that more than 7,000 Palestinians were in Israel’s jails . Livingstone said that Sharon shared responsibility for the Sabra and Shatila massacres .
 Since its birth, Israel has enjoyed the strong support of the Western countries with influential domestic Zionist lobbies . Israel has had a strong support from the West since its birth .
 The U.S. has provided large budgetary support, allowed tax exemption for private donations, facilitated market access, supplied the latest military weapons, and abused its veto power in the Security Council to shield Israel from resolutions condemning its actions . Israel's policies in flagrant violation of international law and
 U.S. policy has provoked deep resentment in the Arab world, Pakistan and other Muslim countries sympathetic to the just cause of the Palestinians . The United States policy has caused deep resentment among Muslims .
 It has fuelled rage and the rise of extremism responsible for terrorist attacks on U.S. targets . It has also fuelled rage against President Obama's administration .
 The U.S. political elite ignored this root cause as Zionist lobbies exploited the popular outrage against terrorism . Ariel Sharon’s government resorted to demonlsation. The United States political elite, however, conspicuously ignored this .
 Bernard Lewis, 6 a Jewish ‘authority’ on Islam, coined the phrase ‘clash of civilisations’ which was further developed by Harvard professor Samuel Huntington in 1993 . Samuel Huntington developed the phrase in an article in the prestigious Foreign Affairs in 1993. Bernard Lewis
 Anti-Islamic activists exploited the 9/11 crime to stoke anti-Islamic hysteria . Even though the perpetrators were not religious men and their motivations were political, the anti-lslamic activists exploited it .
 Daniel Pipes, an American-Israeli political activist, relied on ‘quotes taken out of context, guilt by association, errors of fact, and innuendo’ to whip up hatred against Islam .
 The predominant political thought in the Muslim world does not regard the West as an adversary . The West is not considered an adversary by Muslims, the Muslim leader says .
 The West has made undeniable progress in all fields of knowledge, including political, economic and social sciences . It recognises the desperate need for cooperation in order to end centuries of stagnation, by benefiting from the undeniable progress the West made .
 It blamed the government for characterising the new threat of Muslim militancy in a way that offended most Muslims . It blamed government for making the claim offensive to Muslims .
 Politically motivated acts of militancy and violence, by an extremist fringe among Muslims, unleashed a wave of Islamophobia in countries with significant Muslim immigrant populations, especially the U.S., France, Germany, and the Netherlands .
 Doors began to close for the admission of Muslim students to institutions of higher education . Doors were closed for admission of Muslims to higher education institutions .
 Discrimination in employment deprived immigrants of jobs in business, industry . Discrimination also deprived immigrants from business and industry jobs, study finds .
 Muslims became targets of FBI interrogations, while mosques came under surveillance, creating a state of fear . In the United States ‘profiling criteria came to include ethnicity, national origin and religion, a heightened scrutiny and harassment at airports .
 An uncounted numbers of innocent Muslims, including a large number of Pakistanis, suffered detention without charge, loss of jobs, deportation, and discrimination, not to mention humiliation .
 Some Western countries known for religious tolerance were beset with an eruption of hostility towards Islam . Some of the other Western countries were besets with hostility towards Muslims .
 In the Netherlands, Muslim immigrants and settlers, already suffering discrimination, were exposed to a new campaign of hate after the brutal murder of Dutch film producer Theo van Gogh in November 2004, by a Muslim .
 Islam upholds the sanctity of human life and abhors the killing of even a single innocent person . Islam is an Islamic religion that upholds sanctity .
 Islam teaches the noble precept of human fraternity, and abhorrence of discrimination on grounds of race or colour, language or national origin, wealth or gender . Islam teaches us that it is an abhorrence to discrimination .
 Enlightened leaders in the West were also anxious to avoid besmirching Islam and alienating the large Muslim world . Enlightened Western leaders were anxious not to besmirch Islam or alienate the Muslim world.
 President Bush and Prime Minister Blair took the trouble to quote from the Quran to emphasize that Islam was a religion of peace . Bush and Blair said Islam is a religion that promotes peace .
 An individual performs the obligation by thought, word and action against evil conduct or social injustice . An individual is an individual who performs the duty by thought and action . The obligation is to speak out against injustice .
 Faced with such a situation, an individual can decide on what he or she can reasonably do . Facing a situation such as this, a person can decide what to do, says CNN.com .
 A decision on behalf of the community can only be made only by lawful authority . A decision must be made by a lawful authority, it is said .
 Rulers of Muslim states have historically used the term of jihad in the same sense as states in Europe used the doctrine of'just war’, developed by Hugo Grotius .
 There is no warrant in Islamic law for the use of the term jihad by an individual to proclaim violence against another person, much less to foist the duty of jihad on the community .
 Far from being the lawful head of the world Muslim community, he was a rebel against the government of his own country—Saudi Arabia . Far from be a leader of the Muslim world, he fought against his own government .
 Bin Laden’s deputy, Ayman al-Zawahiri, arrogated to himself the authority to urge people to support the Pakistani Taliban in ‘jihad’ and resist the U.S. for ‘leading a crusade’ to divide Pakistan .
 Such ‘privatisation of war’ has been rightly equated to terrorism, 17 which has no sanction under any legal system in the world . Such 'privatisations of war' has no legal sanction under the world, writes Andrew Hammond . ‘Privatisation�
 Bin Laden and many of his followers were from amongst the twenty-five thousand Arabs recruited by the CLA to join the Afghan Mujahideen in their liberation struggle .
 After the war was won, some of the volunteers, skilled in fighting or planning attacks, joined bin Laden and Al Qaeda . The volunteers were trained in fighting, planning attacks .
 Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the United Kingdom were also their victims . Pakistan and Saudi Arabia were also victims .
 In 2009, a British court convicted members of a London-based gang of British nationals, of Pakistan origin, of conspiracy to blow up seven trans-Atlantic passenger aircrafts . In September 2009, members of the gang were convicted of conspiracy .
 Investigations discovered the involvement of A1 Qaeda in Pakistan in masterminding the plot . A1 al-Qaeda in Pakistan is believed to have masterminded the plot in Pakistan .
 The 57-member ICFM reiterated condemnation of the 11 September outrage, cooperation in bringing perpetrators to justice for deserved punishment, and willingness to contribute .
 Islamic teachings uphold the sanctity of human life, prohibit the killing of innocent people and emphasise tolerance, understanding and coexistence among people of different faiths . It also underlined Islamic teachings .
 Another important conference to highlight harmony among civilisations was convened by Tbrkey in February 2002 .
 Colloquium attended by foreign ministers of OIC and EU members held in Istanbul, Turkey . Held in a land which witnessed over the millennia interaction of great civilisations, the colloquium was attended .
 They emphasised instead of the history of mutually beneficial interaction among civilisations . They said the history was of mutual beneficial interaction .
 Over recent centuries, hundreds of thousands of students from Africa and Asia travelled to Europe and America in pursuit of knowledge .
 The West's advances in science and technology, philosophy and politics, they contributed, on their return, to the progress of their own societies, they say . They contributed to the West’s advances in technology and philosophy .
 The need was also recognised to combat the extremist fringe within Muslim societies . The need also recognised is to combat extremism within Muslim society .
 President Musharraf was personally targeted three times in 2003 and 2004 . Three times in three years, he was targeted by the Taliban .
 Barack Obama’s statements before and after his election as president evinced a better understanding of Islam and the concerns of the Muslim world . Barack Obama's statements before, after and after he was elected as president .
 'Some terrorist organisations are not representative of a broader Arab community,' he said in 2009 . Instead, he said: 'It is important for us to recognize that we have a battle or war against terrorists'
 As far back as the first century ad, Jewish sect of Zealots targeted fellow Jews suspected of aiding the Romans .
 Extremist interpretations of Christianity misled medieval Christendom to unleash the crusades against Muslims . The crusades were unleashed by the Crusades against the Muslims .
 ‘Assassins’ waged a campaign of terror against other Muslims during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries . The ‘assassin’s’, an extremist sub-sect of Muslims, waged a terror campaign against Muslims .
 In the fifteenth century, Muslims were liquidated in Spain and the Inquisition carried out brutal burnings of alleged heretics at the stake . In the 15th century, Spain liquidated Muslims and burned them at stake .
 The Spanish clergy subjected the indigenous people in Central and South America to a veritable genocide starting in the sixteenth century . The indigenous people were subjected to a genocide by the clergy .
 Millions of people perished in the Thirty Years War between Catholic and Protestant Christians in the seventeenth century . Millions of Catholics and Protestants died in the war .
 Roman emperors Tiberius and Caligua executed people to terrorise the opposition . They executed people in the manner of terrorising the opposition to them .
 During the French Revolution, the Jacobins officially proclaimed the ‘Reign of Terror’ in 1793 to ensure their power in the face of opposition . The Jacobins proclaimed the 'Reigns of Terror' in the name of the Terror in France .
 Medieval invaders ordered arson and slaughter in cities that resisted their attacks . Medieval invaders routinely ordered arson, slaughter and arson in cities resisted resistance . Medieval invasions were known to order arson, murder and arson attacks .
 As recently as the twentieth century, Britain, France and Portugal unleashed terror against freedom movements in their colonies . Britain, Portugal and Britain, Britain and France unleashed terror .
 India has used even more savage, if modern, methods to suppress the Kashmiri struggle for freedom . The number of victims since 1989 is estimated at 60,000-100,000 .
 The threat posed by terrorism was exploited by the U.S. to force a regime change in Iraq, author says . Terrorist terrorism was used to force regime change, he says .
 For the first time since the end of the Cold War, a superpower resorted to use of force not only without authorisation by the Security Council, but in defiance of its manifest opposition . The first time a superpower, founder of the United Nations and a permanent member of the . Security Council
 The intelligence reports and documents presented by the U.S. Secretary of State before the Security Council in February 2003 as proof of Iraqi possession of prohibited weapons were subsequently exposed to be concocted .
 Iraq suffered colossal destruction of communications and urban infrastructure due to U.S. bombardment . Iraq suffered . destruction of . communications and . urban infrastructure .
 Losses of life were so great that the United States obstructed their count . The United States had to stop their count of the dead .
 Unofficial estimates vary from hundreds of thousands to a million dead . Unofficial estimate: Hundreds of thousands of people died in the fighting .
 The United States incurred heavy losses in blood, treasure and international prestige . The U.S. suffered heavy losses to the United States .
 By 2008, the war became so unpopular within the U.S. as to constrain policy change by the Bush administration . The war was so unpopular that Bush administration could not change its policy .
 Israeli state agencies resorted to a campaign of terror in 1948 to kill Palestinians and expel hundreds of thousands from their homes . Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians were expelled from homes in 1948 .
 Israel has persisted in state terrorism and aggression over six decades in its preconceived aim of territorial expansion, subjecting the people of Palestine to occupation and repression . Exploiting massive military and economic support by the United States and . Zionist lobbies, and protected by United States veto power in
 Millions of Palestinians have been forced to take refuge in neighbouring Arab countries . Millions of Palestinian refugees have fled the region .
 Ariel Sharon, a right-wing Israeli politician, ‘shared responsibility’ for massacres in Sabra and Shatila in the early 1970s . Ariel Sharon 'shared responsibility' for the massacres, he said .
 For a time, the Palestinian tragedy seemed to be moving towards a solution . But now, it seems to have been moving towards an end to the tragedy .
 Palestinian Liberation Organization recognised Israel’s right to exist in 1988 . Palestinian Liberation Organisation recognised Israel's right to existence in 1988.
 In 1993, President Clinton mediated a successful meeting between President Yasser Arafat and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin in Washington . The meeting laid the foundation for the Oslo Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements .
 Clinton convened another summit in December 2000 at Camp David, to promote an agreement on the final status of Jerusalem . Ehud Barak obstructed a compromise but Clinton convened a Camp David summit at the end of December 2000 .
 Ariel Sharon re-embarked on Israel’s old policies of expansion and ethnic cleansing by systematic violence and terror . Sharon's successor, Barak's successor Ariel Sharon, re-started on the old policies . Sharon was the prime minister of Israel in the 1990s .
 The Israelis re-entered Palestinian towns, which halted the political process, halted the process . The Israeli government re-invited Palestinian towns to the region . The Palestinians have been forced to leave their homes in Gaza .
 Bush administration remained a silent spectator as Israel exploited the post-9/11 environment to intensify polices of repression to terrorise the Palestinian people . Bush administration was silent spectator to Israel's repression of Palestinians .
 The United States policy review in 2009 by President Barack Obama raised new hopes of a peace settlement . U.S. policy review by Obama in 2009 raised hopes of peace settlement in Afghanistan .
 In a speech in Cairo in June 2009, he called for a halt to Israeli settlements .
 The High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change appointed by the UN Secretary General in 2003 recommended such an approach . The panel was set up by the United Nations in 2003 .
 Dissuasion is working to reverse the causes or facilitators of terrorism, including through promoting social and political rights, the rule of law and democratic reform .
 Efforts to counter extremism, including through education and fostering debate, are underway . Efforts include education, fostering debate .
 Development of better instruments for global counter-terrorism cooperation, all within a legal framework that is respectful of civil liberties and human rights, says the UK .
 Building state capacity to prevent terrorist recruitment and operations . State capacity for preventing terrorist recruitment, operations. Building capacity for state capacity .
 The High Level Panel emphasized the need to resolve ‘long-standing disputes which continue to fester and to feed the new threats we now face.’
 He criticised repressive tactics, saying, ‘Terrorism is in itself a direct attack on human rights and the rule of law’
 A1 Qaeda and others with a vested interest in TTP, led by Baitullah Mehsud, started attacking military convoys and check-posts, police personnel and premises and civilian officials, resulting in heavy casualties . A1 Al Qaeda and other groups have been supplying lethal weapons
 The Taliban unleashed a wave of suicide bombings by brainwashed youth on civilian population, killing large numbers of citizens and destroying valuable assets . Soon they also unleashed a . wave of . suicide bombings on civilian . population .
 A foreign embassy was bombed and a prestigious hotel was destroyed in the federal capital . Foreign embassies were bombed in the capital's federal capital in 2009 .
 Former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto was assassinated on 27 December 2007 . Former Pakistani Prime Minister was assassinated in 2007 .
 Fear and insecurity stalked the whole country as 3,317 persons were killed in 2009 . The country was plagued by insecurity in 2009, with 3, 317 people killed .
 TTP masterminded the most destructive attacks on Pakistan . TTP recruited thousands of students of seminaries and other unemployed men to unleash a campaign of terror .
 A Taliban group led by Maulana Fazlullah overwhelmed police and administrative personnel in Swat . The Taliban group has imposed their rule on the scenic valley depriving inhabitants of tourist income .
 On their own part the Taliban defaulted in laying down arms as required under the agreement . The Taliban have not laid down arms since the agreement was reached .
 By May 2009 three million inhabitants of Swat and adjoining districts were forced to abandon their homes and became refugees in their own country . The security situation deteriorated to the extent that by May 2009 3 million people had been forced to leave their homes .
 Popular opinion in Pakistan realized terrorists posed an existential threat to their country . Popular opinion now realized that the terrorists posed a threat to the democratic system .
 The militant extremists wanted to impose a system of authoritarian rule that was inconsistent with Pakistan's cultural ethos and the moderate and progressive vision of the founding fathers . The militants wanted to take over the administration and impose an authoritarian rule .
 Pakistan was fighting the ‘war on terror' also for its own survival . It became evident that Pakistan is fighting the 'war against terror' for its survival .
 The elected government initially opted for negotiations with the Taliban . But it soon found the Taliban were neither amenable to compromise nor reliable in implementation of agreed terms . The Taliban were not willing to compromise or implement agreed terms.
 Most political parties then joined in support of the government for the restoration of the writ of the state . Most of the political parties now support the government .
 The armed forces succeeded within three months to recover control of terrorists in Swat . The bulk of the displaced persons were able to return to their homes .
 Sri Lankan President Chandrika Kumaratungc made a statement to this effect at the SAARC summit at Kathmandu in 2002 . Sri Lanka's president made the statement at the 2002 SAARC Summit .
 Jim Lobe, 'Anti-Muslim activist plants new seeds of hatred’, says Lobe . Lobe: ‘Anti-Islam activist plants seeds of hate’
 He does not even mention the Muslim world as one of the important features of the current international environment . The Muslim world is an important feature of the international environment, he says .
 U.S. Defense Science Board report, Dawn, 26 November 2004 . United States Defense Science board report . Report: Pakistan, Pakistan .
 Message to the antiterrorism conference in Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia .
 Noorani in, ‘Jihad vs Terrorism,’ Criterion Quarterly, Islamabad, April-June 2009, 11.11.05 . He was the author of a book on terrorism .
 Al-Zawahiri is known as a proponent of the view that democracy is shirk hi Allah'— blasphemy— because it allows people to usurp the right of legislation, which, according to him, vests in Allah alone . He is known for his views that democracy
 Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia called for the establishment of an international centre . Crown prince called for establishment of the international centre in Saudi Arabia .
 For an informative study of the abuse of religion for violence and war, see Shah war Junaid . For more information on the use of religion in violence, see the Shah war of war .
 Jewish Zealots targeted other Hebrews in the first century . Among the examples, the author recalls are; Jewish Zealot targeted other . Hebrews .
 The Assassins belonged to a secret sub-sect of Muslims who conducted a campaign of terror against other Muslims in the twelfth century in what is Syria . The Assassins were a Muslim sub-section of Muslims .
 Medieval Christendom launched the notorious Crusades against Muslims to conquer the Holy Land . The Crusades were launched by the Crusades in medieval Christianity .
 In the fifteenth century, the Spanish Inquisition tortured and executed Christians they considered heretics . In the 15th century, Christians considered heretic were tortured by the Inquisition . The Spanish Inquisition was known for torturing and executing Christians .
 Millions of Muslims, and Hindus and Sikhs were killed in politically-motivated riots before and afler the independence of India and Pakistan in 1947 . Millions were killed before and after independence of the two countries in 1947.
 German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer said ‘US power is a decisive factor for world peace and security’
 A world order cannot function when the national interests of the most powerful nation are the defining criteria for the deployment of that nation’s military might, writes Andrew Hammond . Hammond says a world order can't function when national interests are defined as defining criteria .
 Report of the High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change, UN General Assembly document, 29 November 2004, 41. 2b. Report of  2004, UN . Report: High-level Panel on threats and challenges and change .
 Pakistan's prime minister was assassinated in 1999 by the Taliban in 1998 . He was killed by the Pakistani Taliban in 1999 . The Taliban have been blamed for the deaths .
 The roots of antagonism between Pakistan and India can be traced to Hindu-MusLim relations and contention between the Indian National Congress and the Muslim League . Pakistan-India Relations, 2001-09 Retrospect .
 The evolution of relations between the states of South Asia since Independence is better understood in the secular paradigm of a conflict of aims between a more powerful state seeking domination and a less powerful neighbour aspiring to protect their rights . The evolution has been seen as a conflict between the more powerful states seeking domination
 India ignored the legitimate aspirations of its smaller neighbours for relations based on the principle of sovereign equality . Forgetting its own struggle for independence, India ignored its own aspirations of smaller neighbours .
 India imposed unequal treaties on the Himalayan kingdoms of Hindu Nepal and Buddhist Bhutan . Nepal and Bhutan were ruled by the Indian Empire .
 Sikkim was forcibly occupied and annexed despite the treaty India had signed recognising its separate and autonomous status . India had agreed to a treaty recognising the territory as an autonomous and autonomous state . Sikim was annexed by India despite a treaty which recognises its separate status .
 India’s imperial attitude is partly inherited from the predecessor British Raj 2, but its roots are traceable to great power ambitions cultivated in the minds of the Indian political elite by leaders of the late nineteenth century .
 India’s title to world power status was asserted long before the country became independent . They conjured up and asserted India's status as a world power power .
 It was not merely an aspiration to greatness which every nation has a right to cherish . But their dream envisaged the aim of domination over neighbours . Their dream was to be the aim to dominate neighbours .
 Nehru urged proclamation of an Indian Monroe doctrine with respect to Asian countries . Hegemonic in his narrow nationalistic drive, on the eve of Independence Nehru even urged the proclamation . Nehru had urged an India Monroe doctrine .
 If India could not impose its will on Pakistan immediately upon Independence, Nehru looked forward to a time when it would be able to do so .
 But that superiority is not so great to produce results in war or by fear of war, he says . It's not so much of the superiority that can produce results by fear or war .
 Our national interest demands that we should adopt a peaceful policy towards Pakistan . Therefore, our national interest requires a peaceful approach, says Shah .
 Strength comes not from the armed forces but the industrial and economic background behind them . Strength ultimately comes from the industrial background behind the military, not the military . The U.S. has been in the grip of the world's most powerful institutions .
 As we grow in strength, Pakistan will feel less inclined to threaten or harass us . Pakistan will be in a mood to accept a settlement that we consider fair, whether in Kashmir or elsewhere, says Hussain .
 Firsdy, the goal pursued by this ambitious Nehru is the establishment of a great empire unprecedented in India’s history . Nehru's goal is to establish an empire unprecedented, he writes . Firdy: Nehru was an ambitious and ambitious leader .
 After India’s independence, the Indian ruling circles headed by Nehru inherited and have tried their best to preserve the bequests of the British colonial rulers . They have become increasingly brazen in carrying out their chauvinistic and expansionist policy .
 The drive to impose its own preferences on less powerful neighbours in utter disregard of the principles of justice and international law has been manifest in India’s insistence on the bilateral settlement of differences and disputes, which allows it to exploit power disparity for duress .
 India has refused to utilise the other peaceful means for settlement of disputes . India's refusal to use peaceful means means evolved by the community of states through centuries of experience .
 The parties to any dispute should seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation or arbitration, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means .
 After 9/11, New Delhi tried to paint Pakistan into the terrorist corner . New Delhi wanted Pakistan to be bracketed with the Taliban .
 Indian leaders accused Pakistan of sponsoring terrorism, bracketed it with the Taliban and adopted the pose that India, too, was a victim of terrorism . Exploiting worldwide outrage against terrorism, Indian leaders said Pakistan was sponsoring terrorism . Pakistan has been accused of terrorism by the Taliban .
 Pakistan pointed out that India was not a victim, but a perpetrator of state terrorism . Pakistan says India is not a 'victim' but a 'perpetrator' of terrorism . India has been accused of terrorism in the past .
 The Indian propaganda line failed because Pakistan adopted a provident policy that made it a frontline ally in the fight against terrorism . Pakistan has been a front-line ally against terrorism in the past . The Indian government failed to win the vote in Pakistan's favour in the West .
 13 December 2001, armed men entered the premises of the Indian parliament and clashed with security personnel . The shadows lengthened to darken the Pakistan-Pakistan-lndia horizon .
 Indian government charged Pakistan with responsibility for the attacks without any evidence . Without any evidence, the Indian government has accused Pakistan of the attacks .
 It downgraded diplomatic relations, suspended train and air services, and moved forces forward to the border with Pakistan and the Line of Control in Kashmir . It also moved its forces, including strike formations, forward to Pakistan and move its forces forward .
 India has demanded that Pakistan hand over twenty Indian and Pakistani nationals who are alleged to have hijacked Indian airliners and committed other acts of terrorism in India over the previous twenty years . It also demanded that the Pakistanis hand over 20 Indian and Pakistanis who are accused of hijacking Indian air
 Pakistan moved its troops to forward defensive positions . Faced with the threat of aggression, Pakistan moved troops to front defensive positions. Pakistan says it has been under attack by the Taliban .
 On more than one occasion the two countries came dangerously close to the brink of war . For a year the two armies stood ‘eyeball to eyeball’ for a year . For more than a year, the two nations stood 'eyeballs to eye'
 The danger of a conflict was averted due to an unprecedented combination of factors . Fortunately for both nations, the danger of an outbreak of violence has been averted .
 All major powers from the U.S. to the European Union. Moreover, all major powers. from the United States to the . European Union to the EU.
 After nearly a year, having incurred colossal expenditure and exposed Pakistan to a similar burden, India decided to begin withdrawal of its forces towards peacetime positions . India decided the withdrawal of forces was a cost-effective measure .
 New Delhi followed a single-track policy of threatening Pakistan, demanding an end to what it called ‘infiltration’ and labelling the Kashmiri freedom struggle as a ‘terrorist’ movement . Meanwhile, New Delhi has labelled Kashmiri independence as a terrorist .
 Pakistan responded with restraint and reason, refraining from diplomatic brick batting . Pakistan responded to the situation with restraint, reason .
 Islamabad proposed reactivation of UNMOGIP to monitor alleged violations of Line of Control by Infiltrators . Islamabad also proposed a dialogue to discuss an extradition treaty with Pakistan .
 Pakistan reciprocates by announcing a ceasefire on the LOC and withdrawing the ban on overflights . Pakistan reciprocated by announcing the ceasefire and withdrawing a ban on over-flight .
 The agreed components of the dialogue included peace and cooperation, terrorism, drug trafficking, and friendly exchanges . Peace and cooperation was discussed in advance of the talks .
 Foreign Secretaries completed four rounds and started the fifth round in July 2008 . Over the next four years Foreign . Secretaries of the Foreign. Secretaries have been involved in four rounds .
 Senior officers held meetings to discuss Confidence Building Measures and bilateral disputes .
 Major agreements reached during the period up to 2008 related to CBMs . As may be noted from the list below, major agreements were reached during that period .
 Volume rose from $235 million in 2002 to $1,956 million in 2008, largely due to an increase in Indian exports to Pakistan . Pakistan’s exports to India stagnated at $254 million, while the volume rose at $234 million .
 Pakistan complained against India’s ‘rigid and restrictive’ import policy . 2001-09 3 1 5 regime that in practice obstructed its declaratory import policy basis of MFN treatment .
 In Jammu and Kashmir, the line of control resulting from the ceasefire of December 17, shall be respected by both sides without prejudice to the recognized position of either side . The ceasefire was agreed on December 17 .
 Neither side shall seek to alter it unilaterally irrespective of mutual differences and legal implications . Neither side will seek to change it unilaterally, regardless of the legal implications of the agreement .
 Both sides undertake to refrain from the threat of use of force in violation of this line . Both sides also undertake to abstain from using force against each other . The United States and the United Kingdom will not engage in further negotiations .
 No agreement was reached on delimitation of the boundary in Sir Creek . No agreement has been reached on the boundary of the Sir Creek.
 New Delhi reportedly proposed that the demarcation exercise should begin from the seaward side of the border . New Delhi has also proposed that it should start from the seaard side .
 Joint surveys of the boundary in the Rann of Kutch revealed that 29 of the 67 boundary pillars were missing . Joint surveys also revealed 29 were missing in the region .
 Pakistan pointed out that the storage of 342,000-acre feet behind the barrage would constitute a violation of the Indus Waters Treaty . The treaty allows storage of up to 10,000 acre feet for non-consumptive purposes . Pakistan points out that such a breach of the treaty
 India did not address that point but argued the project involved the construction of a ‘lock 1’ and not a barrage . Water stored behind it during the summer months would be released between October to February .
 At their preliminary meeting in 2004, Foreign Secretaries discussed Jammu and Kashmir . They agreed to carry forward the talks for a peaceful settlement . The talks were held in 2004 .
 Joint statements issued after subsequent meetings made no reference to any substantive talks by them on the subject . However, joint statements issued by the two sides made no mention of any substantive discussions .
 According to him, the state had seven geographical regions with different religions, sects and languages . Some of these regions should remain with one side or the other, he said . Others could become autonomous, be placed under UN trusteeship or a condominium, he added .
 'Seven region' theory of ‘seven region’ novel and questionable on facts . ‘Solution’ he suggested was flagrantly contrary to Pakistan’s recognised position of Pakistan .
 Musharraf’s ‘personal’ ideas stunned the Pakistani nation and the people of Jammu and Kashmir . The Pakistani nation was stunned by the 'personal' ideas .
 The Government of Pakistan did not endorse the irresponsible statement, and the parliament ignored it . The parliament ignored the statement, according to the Pakistani government .
 Musharraf’s suggestion of a seven regional solution did not receive any response even from India . The proposal of a regional solution was not accepted by India .
 He nominated a class-fellow, not known for any expertise on Kashmir much less international affairs, to start a ‘back-channel’ dialogue with the Indian prime ministers nominee . The nominee was a senior diplomat and former ambassador to Pakistan .
 Discussions on the back-channel were said to have made some progress but no agreement was reached . Discussions have been made but no deal has been reached with the British government .
 Musharraf told an Indian TV interviewer in July 2008 that back-channel discussions came close to agreements on all three disputes—Kashmir, Siachen, Sir Creek and Sir Creek . He said the talks were close to an agreement on the three disputes .
 Musharraf said Sir Creek was 'most likely' for conclusion related to Sir Creek . Siachen was also ‘possible’ and the back channel had also worked out three principles that could lead to settlement of Jammu and Kashmir .
 India wanted the line of control to be made permanent but he favoured finessing this issue . He further stated that India wanted to make the line-control permanent . He also said that India also wanted to be able to keep control of the border .
 The restoration of a democratic government in Pakistan after the February 2008 elections has left open the question of the impact of Musharraf’s ‘personal’ ideas and the understandings allegedly reached in the back-channel talks, on Jammu and Kashmir .
 The elected government has not publicly stated its views on the issue . Preoccupied with multiple crises at home, the elected government is not publicly stating its views .
 Responsible statements have emphasized that a settlement must be in conformity with the aspirations of the Kashmiri people . Responsible . statements have, however, emphasized that . a settlement . must be . in conformity . with the people's aspirations .
 Musharraf stated, 'there is no official exchange of documents and there are no official agreements which have been finalized and inked,' that a text agreed but not signed by Foreign Ministers gets consigned to the dustbin of history . The draft declaration of the abortive Agra Summit
 Pakistani federal authorities initiated a thorough investigation, which revealed that the crime was planned in Pakistan . Upon receipt of an official report from India, Pakistani authorities initiated an investigation .
 Indian media blamed Pakistan for delay in beginning prosecution, ignoring the fact that the India authorities had not yet begun action in the case of the terrorist attack on the Samjhota Express train on 18 February 2007 . Over sixty passengers, including Pakistani nationals, were killed .
 Pakistani Prime Minister also mentioned that ‘Pakistan has some information on threats in Balochistan and other areas’ Peace in Kashmir .
 Sixty years of Indian occupation and repression has steeled the will of the Kashmiri people . Kashmiris have steeled their will against Indian oppression and repression . Indian occupation of Kashmir has been a source of tension in the region .
 Their heroic struggle and sacrifices have demonstrated their resolve to win freedom . They demonstrated their determination to win their country's freedom, writes CNN.com .
 India’s threat or use of force has not intimidated Pakistan to acquiesce in the usurpation of Kashmir . Pakistan has not been able to resist India's use of violence in Kashmir . Kashmir has been a source of tension between Pakistan and India .
 Relations between Pakistan and India remain strained, and prospects of normalisation as distant as ever . Meanwhile, relations between the two countries remain strained .
 Hopes of success will remain elusive so long as India persists in its policy of denying or circumventing the right of the Kashmiri people to self-determination . India's policy of not recognising Kashmir's right of self-deterioration will not work .
 The Security Council has not resumed consideration of the Kashmir question since the early 1960s . The prospect of addressing the issue remain bleak in the foreseeable future .
 Governments of the most permanent members of the Security Council have taken the position that the Kashmir dispute should be resolved by peaceful negotiations between Pakistan and India .
 Their heroic sacrifices in the protracted struggle for Azadi are a guarantee that the cause will endure . Their sacrifice is the guarantee that Azadi will endure, says the Iranian president .
 By contrast, India’s savage repression has exposed the colonial nature of its stranglehold over occupied Kashmir . Kashmir has been ruled out of Kashmir by Kashmiris since 1999 .
 Civilised opinion in the world, and in India itself, cannot fail to recognise the inevitability of conceding to the Kashmiri people their aspiration .
 Hurriyat leaders asked to be associated with the dialogue between Rakistan and India on the question of settlement of Jammu and Kashmir . Hurriyaat leaders have asked for the dialogue .
 Pakistan was agreeable to associate genuine leaders of the state with a dialogue but India opposed the suggestion . Pakistan has historically maintained that a settlement of Jammu and Kashmir must conform to the wishes of the people of the region . India has always opposed the idea .
 President Musharraf’s ’personal views’ were, these could not compromise the rtsolutions of the United Nations or the inherent right of the Kashmiri people for self-determination . The United Nations and the Kashmir people should not compromise their rights, says Mushar
 Any debate over alternative options is at best an academic exercise . Meanwhile, any debate over alternatives is academic exercise. Meanwhile, the debate is academic .
 President Musharraf’s ‘personal suggestion’ for a regional solution also remained an exercise in futility as were such ideas in the past . The president's personal suggestion to solve the problem was also an exercise of futility .
 The alternatives to a state-wide plebiscite or one only in the valley, partition, status quo, independence, and UN trusteeship, were bruited in the past, too, in Pakistan or India, mostly unofficially .
 None was acceptable to all three parties, including the people of Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan and India . None of the three parties were acceptable to each other, says Ravi Agrawal .
 A state-wide plebiscite remained the only formula bearing the imprimatur of Security Council resolutions for the determination of the future of the Jammu and Kashmir by its people . State-wide plebiscites are only formula for the resolution of the Security Council .
 Regional alternative was first conceived in 1950 by UN mediator Owen Dixon . The regional alternative was created by the United Nations in 1950 .
 The plan envisaged a plebiscite only in ‘the Valley of Kashmir and perhaps some adjacent country’ assuming that some areas were certain to vote for accession to Pakistan and some for accession to India . Alternatively, he would have envisaged only a ple
 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was prepared to discuss the second alternative of a plebiscite in the valley alone, Dixon says . Dixon: Nehru had been prepared to talk about the second option .
 Sheikh Abdullah, then at the helm in Indian-held part of the state, could swing or manipulate the vote in the valley in India’s favour . Apparently he calculated that Sheikh Abdullah could swing the vote .
 India had earlier rejected proposals for demilitarisation and UN administration to ensure a free and impartial plebiscite . Pakistan was not unaware of the risk of rigging under Abdullah .
 The regional plebiscite idea was little to Prime Minister Liaquat Ali Khan's liking because it would amount to a deviation from the Security Council resolution . Besides, the idea was also rejected by the PM .
 Sheikh Abdullah floated the idea of independence after New Delhi’s interference in Kashmir . He said that his friend Nehru was intent on maintaining Indian occupation and had no intention of allowing fair and impartial plebiscite .
 Nehru used him to give the appearance of legitimacy to the Indian grab of the state against the principle of the partition, he belatedly started protesting . Realising he had been deceived and Nehru had merely used him .
 Thereupon he was dismissed and jailed in 1953 and remained there for twelve years . He was dismissed, jailed and jailed for 12 years .
 The only serious Pakistan-India dialogue on Kashmir took place after the Sino-Indian border clash in 1962 . Only serious dialogue took place between Pakistan and India after Sino and Indian border clash .
 At the urging of Britain and the United States, the two countries agreed to talks specifically focused on Kashmir alone . The talks were held in Kashmir at the request of British and U.S. officials .
 At first, the Indian side appeared open to discussion of the idea of partitioning the state on the basis of the presumed wishes of its people . But it backtracked as soon as the Chinese forces withdrew to the pre-war lines .
 Swaran Singh then spoke of the possibility of only minor adjustments in the ceasefire line . Singh then said that the ceasefire would only be minor adjustments to the line .
 Pakistan resolutely resisted the Indian proposal and refused to barter away the right of the Kashmiri people to self-determination . Despite terrible pressures following the 1971 disaster following the disaster, Pakistan refused to give up Kashmir .
 Acceptability to Kashmiri people has remained an explicit premise for any settlement formula, Pakistan government has reiterated again and again . Acceptability has remained a key premise for a settlement formula in Kashmiri dispute .
 Media analysts have long talked about some of these alternatives to a statewide plebiscite . But there has been no sign of flexibility from the Indian side .
 In a speech in November 2004, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh ruled out redrawing of borders or further division . Prime Minister in 2004 ruled out any redrawings of borders .
 Hurriyat leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani expressed disappointment that the agreements between the Indian and Pakistani leaders brought no relief to the Kashmiri people . After the 18 April 2005 joint statement, a joint statement was made by the two leaders .
 George K Tanham, Indian Strategic Thought, RAND, Santa Monica, 1992, v. 1992, .
 The Encyclopaedia of the Indian National Congress is published by Moin Zaidi and Shaheda Zaida .
 The president made the suggestion informally at an iftar dinner in 2004 . The suggestion was made at a dinner in October 2004 .
 Later he clarified that his statement should not be understood to give up Pakistan's recognised position on the issue . Later he said his statement shouldn't be understood as Pakistan's recognition of Pakistan's position .
 As wars became too destructive, major European Powers began to realize the need for preventing them . Chapter 23 UN and Other Organisations .
 Christian monarchies in Europe formed a Holy Alliance which, however, did not prove effective . To that end, Christian monarchs in Europe had to form an alliance .
 After the Napoleonic wars, major powers formed the Concert of Europe, which, too, did not succeed to prevent wars . Major powers failed to succeed in preventing wars in Europe, too .
 Its principal organs included an Assembly of all members, and a Council of nine members . Britain, France, Italy, Japan, and the United States were among the nine members of the Council .
 The United States did not join as the Senate rejected ratification of the Covenant . The U.S. did not .
 The League failed to prevent the Italian invasion and occupation of Ethiopia or Germany from annexing Austria and Czechoslovakia . The League did not prevent the invasion of Ethiopia, or the annexation of Austria or Germany .
 Victorious allies resolved to establish the United Nations, to succeed the League of Nations . The United Nations was established to save the world from the scourge of war .
 Charter requires UN members to refrain from the threat or use of force against territorial integrity or political independence of any state, and to settle their disputes by peaceful means .
 One of the purposes of the United Nations is to bring about settlement of international disputes by peaceful means and in conformity with principles of justice and international law . The U.N. aims to settle international disputes with peaceful means, says the UN .
 The other important purposes include promotion of international cooperation for solving economic, social, cultural, and humanitarian problems . The United States is one of the world's most powerful countries .
 A negative vote by a permanent member of the Security Council prevents a decision on all but procedural matters . In that function, it was paralyzed from the start because of discord between the USSR and the US .
 Prospects of the U.N. brightened after the end of the Cold War in 1991 .
 The Russian Federation began to cooperate in efforts to consolidate international peace and security . Russia and the U.S. have been involved in a number of countries in the past .
 The promise of international cooperation for a peaceful and prosperous world was revived . The promise was revived by the promise of cooperation for peace and prosperity .
 They pledged efforts to strengthen respect for the rule of law in international as well as national affairs, strengthen security and promote disarmament . They recognized collective responsibility to uphold human dignity and equity at global level .
 Summit called for efforts to spread the benefits of globalisation, protection of the environment and promotion of human rights, democracy and good governance . Summit also called for strengthening of the United Nations .
 Progress towards the realisation of the Millennium Development Goals during the first five years fell short of its targets . Progress towards realising the Millennium development Goals was not met with the targets .
 China, India and a few other countries of Asia and North Africa contributed to the reduction of the proportion of people in extreme poverty from 30 to 21 per cent . Only the momentum of economic growth in China and India contributed .
 The world’s population continued to grow at an excessive rate, especially in low-income countries . The world's population was projected to increase from 6. billion in 2004 to 9 billion by 2050 .
 Pakistan's high population growth rate posed a serious obstacle to the reduction of unemployment, despite the acceleration of economic growth . In Pakistan, the high number of unemployed people is a serious problem .
 Only five of the twenty-two most affluent countries met the UNendorsed target of 0.2 per cent of GDP for official development assistance . Only six of the rest promised to do so by 2015 .
 Global military expenditure began to gallop in 2002, rising nearly 40 per cent to approach the colossal total of one trillion dollars . Meanwhile, global military expenditure rose nearly 40% to approach a trillion dollars in 2002 . The world's largest military budget is now $1.2 billion .
 Failing states in the Third World, genocide in Rwanda 2 in 1994, 'ethnic cleansing’ in Bosnia 1 in 1995, proliferation of poverty, environmental degradation, the rise of terrorism and recurrent crises in international relations have raised a demand for reform of the United Nations .
 A proposal for enlargement of the Security Council surfaced in the early 1990s . membership had increased greatly since 1965 when the Charter was amended to add four non-permanent seats .
 Japan, Germany and other major states asserted claims to permanent seats . Germany, Japan and Germany also asserted claims .
 Millennium Declaration called for efforts to make the U.N. a more effective instrument for pursuing global priorities . Millennium Declaration: The United Nations should be more effective in pursuing global goals .
 The terrorist attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001, and the U.S. attack on Iraq in 2003, underlined the need for reform . The Security Council’s rejection of its proposal for authorisation of the use of force further underlines the need to reform .
 The panels report put forward a vision of collective security that would address all major threats to international peace and security . The report was released in December 2004 .
 Its recommendation on terrorism, pre-emptive use of force, and enlargement of the Security Council attracted special attention . The Security Council was also discussed .
 Panel says no amount of systemic change in the way the U.N. handles both old and new threats to peace and security will enable it to discharge effectively its role under the Charter .
 Kofi Annan presented a plan for reform focusing on the three pillars of freedom from want, freedom from fear and freedom to live in dignity . Based on the recommendations of the high-level panel and the plan of action prepared by experts, experts said .
 Prior to the summit meeting in September 2005, emphasis shifted to the scandal of corruption in the management of funds accumulated by the UN from export of oil by Iraq .
 Secretary General Kofi Annan exposed to embarrassment because of his son’s role in the award of contracts . Annan's son was in charge of contracts at the time of his father's death .
 The summit meeting held in September 2005 had to be content with the minimum common denominator acceptable to member states . The meeting was held in 2005 .
 Discussion on enlargement of the Security Council began in the General Assembly in 1993 . Discussion on the enlargement began in 1993 in the United States .
 Germany and Japan staked claims to permanent seats on the grounds of their rise in economic power and large contributions to the UN budget . At the same time, Japan and Germany said they wanted permanent seats .
 There were demands for regional balance in the permanent category by addition of other states from Africa, Asia and Latin America . That led to demands for other countries to be included in the category .
 A group of like-minded states known as the Coffee Club, including Argentina, Mexico, Italy, Pakistan, and the Republic of Korea, joined together in support of a democratic and accountable Security Council . They advocated the addition of non-permanent seats only .
 The UN Secretary General appointed a high level panel for advice on enlargement of the Security Council and other UN reform issues . As consensus eluded the General Assembly and the Millennium Summit, the panel was appointed .
 It too was divided and suggested two alternative models for enlargement . It also suggested two alternatives to enlargement.
 Model A provided for the addition of six new permanent seats without veto power, and model B for the creation of a new category of eight four-year renewable-term seats . Model B provided for creation of eight new categories of seats with veto power .
 After Germany, Japan, Brazil, and India formed a group to canvass for model A, the Coffee Club also became more active in support of model B .
 The existing permanent members of the Security Council, each of whom can veto an amendment of the Charter, took divergent positions . Each of them can veto a change to the Charter .
 France and UK endorsed the G-4, the U.S. backed only Japan and was joined by Russia in opposing veto power for new permanent members . China preferred to await the emergence of consensus, and China preferred an early consensus .
 Kofi Annan proposed that a decision should be made by a vote in 2005, China and the U.S. disagreed . China, the United States disagreed, saying decision should await formation of a broad consensus .
 The G-4 circulated a draft resolution in May 2005 providing for expansion of the Security Council to 25 members with six additional permanent seats without the right of veto, and four non-permanent seats . In the hope of expediting a decision, the draft resolution was circulated in 2005 .
 Pending consensus, it is unlikely a resolution would be pressed to a vote . Pending such consensus, the resolution would not be pressed into a vote.
 An amendment of the Charter requires the affirmative vote of nine out of the fifteen members of the Security Council, including the votes of its permanent members, and a two-thirds majority in the General Assembly . An amendment requires nine of the 15 members of its 15 members to vote on an amendment
 The 2005 Summit was held on the 60th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations . Decision was made on core issues of reform of the organisation, progress on implementation of the Millennium Development Goals .
 One hundred and fifty heads of state or government reaffirmed a strong commitment to achieve the Millennium Development Goals . They pledged an additional $50 billion a year to fight poverty . Heads of states or government pledged to commit to achieve Millennium Development goals .
 Some of the major affluent states resisted commitment to 0.3 per cent of GDP for official development assistance . Some of these states however resisted commitment .
 The summit resolution voiced unqualified condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations . The resolution also affirmed the resolve to push for a comprehensive convention against terrorism within a year .
 Leaders agreed to replace the Commission on Human Rights with the Human Rights Council . They requested the General Assembly president to conduct open and transparent negotiations to decide on the new body's functions .
 Those who sought to force through a resolution for the addition of six permanent seats were checkmated largely because of opposition by the United States . The United States opposed the enlargement idea on grounds of its effect on efficiency, and China which supported the group of ‘Uniting for Cons
 No agreement was reached on disarmament and nuclear proliferation due to the refusal of the big powers with the largest nuclear arsenals to commit themselves to reduction of stockpiles . Also no agreement has been reached on the disarmament of nuclear proliferation .
 The summit’s meagre achievements were largely due to disagreement among big powers that sought tighter control over the organisation . The majority of states sought to strengthen collective decisionmaking to address issues of fundamental concern to humanity .
 The attempt to focus on terrorism and 'new threats’ to international peace and security failed to inspire consensus . It ignored wars of aggreuion and failed to provide for more effective action to resolve festering disputes in conformity with the principles of justice .
 Humanity has coveted, craved and struggled for equal rights since the dawn of civilisation . Human Rights has been a struggle for equality since civilisation began . Humanity has long sought equal rights to equal rights in all aspects of life .
 People have sought to curtail and eliminate distinctions and discriminations based on race and colour, and to supplant the arbitrary powers of rulers with a system of laws to protect civil and political rights .
 Renaissance movement in Europe built up the philosophic rationale for civil and political rights . These were then embedded in the constitutions of democratic states .
 The world community embarked on concerted efforts to set international standards of human rights . But it was not until after the Second World War that the world community began to set standards .
 The U.N. Charter reaffirmed faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, and in the equal rights of men and women .
 It also envisioned higher standards of living and full employment, and international cooperation for the realisation of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
 The Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted unanimously by the UN General Assembly on 10 December 1948 . Only the apartheid regime of South Africa and communist states abstained from the declaration .
 The process of binding state parties to respect and require observance of human rights began with the adoption of two international covenants in 1966 . One on economic, social and cultural rights and the other on civil and political rights .
 Both covenants have established monitoring committees which receive reports from state parties on measures adopted by them to give effect to the rights .
 The process of broadening and enlarging human rights has since been accelerated, with the adoption of numerous covenants and conventions on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination, the rights of women and children, and the prohibition of torture .
 Convention on the rights of workers promoted by the International Labour Organisation . Of course, older than any of these are conventions on the right of workers .
 The Human Rights Commission came under strong criticism by the United States and other Western countries . Western countries alleged it had been politicised by the Commission .
 Summit meeting agreed to replace the Commission with the Human Rights Council . In the end, the summit meeting agreed that the Commission should be replaced with the human rights council .
 The constitution of Pakistan requires the state to ensure observance of fundamental rights . The constitution provides safeguards against arrest and detention, forced labour and traffic in human beings, etc.
 The state is also party to most of the human rights treaties . The state has been endeavouring to raise standards of compliance by additional legislation .
 Some of the abuse of Hudood 7 and blasphemy laws have exposed the country to severe criticism at home and abroad . Some of these, especially the abuse, have exposed Pakistan to harsh criticism . The country has been accused of blasphemy laws, Hudood and Hudood .
 The government responded to legitimate concerns by amendments to these laws in 2004-05 to protect innocent people from the excesses resulting from inefficient implementation . The government says the amendments were made to protect people from excessive implementation .
 Social practices prevalent among traditional tribes living in a time warp, such as ‘honour killings,’ and discrimination against women have proved difficult to eradicate despite the laws in force .
 The spread of education and enlightenment has proved to be the only effective remedy in human societies . Education and enlightenment is the only answer to the problem, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 World community has established a number of international agencies to facilitate international cooperation for economic development, expansion of trade, monetary stability and the provision of multilateral and bilateral assistance to developing countries .
 The World Bank was established at Bretton Woods in 1944 for the reconstruction and development of war-shattered economies . The International Bank for Reconstruction and Developmentbetter known as the World Bank .
 Later, it became the primary source of assistance to developing countries . It became the main source of aid to developing nations .
 In 2003, it was operating in over a hundred countries and provided $18. billion in aid . In 2003 it provided assistance to more than 100 countries, providing $18 billion .
 Unlike the World Bank, the IMF is not a provider of economic assistance . The IMF provides loans under adequate safeguards, like the world bank .
 Both countries expect the recipient states to follow agreed programmes and conditions . Both expect the recipients of the funds will follow agreed terms .
 Economics being a developing science, the strategies followed by IFIs have evolved over time, conceding that some past policies were flawed . Economics is a new science, and the strategies have evolved .
 Pakistan has over the decades received substantial amounts in concessional loans from foreign countries and IFIs . Like other developing countries, Pakistan has received large amounts in loans from abroad .
 Of the total foreign debt of $38 billion in the year 2000, bilateral debt was $12 billion . The bulk of the rest was owed to the World Bank, Asian Development Bank, Islamic Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
 Development banks usually provide long-term loans for infrastructure projects at interest rates that are lower than the market rate . Development banks provide long term loans at lower rates than market rates for infrastructure .
 A significant part of the loans are interest-free and repayable over up to forty years . The loans can be repaid over the course of up to 40 years .
 In the decade of the 1990s, Pakistan resorted to borrowing from commercial banks, supplier-credit and foreign currency bonds at usurious rates . In the past decade, Pakistan had to rely on commercial banks and supplier credit .
 The end of multiple sanctions and the resumption of bilateral assistance facilitated financial inflows, while debt rescheduling reduced the annual debt-servicing burden from over $5 billion to less than $3 billion .
 Pakistan’s dependence on foreign loans declined for a couple of years but rose once again after 2007, due to a sudden rise in the price of petroleum and food grains . Pakistan has been in need of foreign loans for several years .
 Balance of payments took a nosedive, despite an increase in remittances . Remittances also increased, despite a drop in remittance payments .
 The energy crisis and need for resources for reconstruction, in the wake of escalation in attacks by terrorists, further necessitated search for external assistance . Three million people displaced by terrorist violence have been displaced by terrorists .
 IMF approved a loan of $7. billion in 2008 and increased the ceiling to $11. billion . The IMF approved the loan in 2008 . IMF has increased the loan ceiling from $7 billion to $10 billion .
 As a result of large borrowings in 2008 and 2009, Pakistan's international debt burden rose to the unprecedented level of $55 billion in 2009 . Despite increased earnings through exports, remittances by Pakistanis abroad and inflow of foreign private investment .
 International trade, increasing 12-fold between 1948 and 1995, has contributed significantly to faster economic growth across the globe . International trade has contributed to the world's economic growth .
 The World Trade Organisation plays an increasingly important role in the promotion of fair and free trade based on binding rules, ensuring transparency and predictability .
 Expiry of Multi-Fabric Agreement was of special importance to Pakistan . This category accounts for some 60 per cent of its exports . Pakistan is one of the world's largest exporters .
 Open international competition was expected to present Pakistan and other major exporters of textile products with an opportunity as well as a challenge .
 Both laws prohibit discrimination between national and foreign persons . Both proscribe discrimination .
 Members of a group may, however, agree to special rates and rules governing intra-group trade . Members of the group may also agree to . special rates .
 The latest round of trade negotiations that began in 2001 covers the Doha Development Agenda, focusing on concerns regarding the implementation of existing agreements, especially relating to agriculture and textiles, and technical barriers .
 With industrialised countries continuing to provide massive support for domestic agriculture, domestic agriculture will continue to grow in India .
 Central to the strategy for promoting a level playing field is a fair regime for trade in agricultural products . Elimination of nontariff measures such as import quotas, domestic support, and especially any subsidies on the export of agricultural products.
 Rapidly warming world climate poses a grave danger to living conditions for the increasing population of the worid unless timely action is taken to reverse the man-made causes .
 Ice accumulated over millennia in the Arctic and Antarctic Polar regions is fast melting . Ice accumulated in the region is melting fast in the past .
 The Maldives with a population of 330,000 is threatened with extinction . Maldives population is estimated to be at risk of extinction . The Maldivian island is home to 330,500 people .
 Scientists project droughts in some parts of the globe and more intense storms in others . Scientists also project more intense and frequent storms in some areas . The storms are expected to be more frequent and frequent .
 Most damaging of man-made causes of global wanning is excessive burning of fossil fuels . Fossil fuels release increasing quantities of carbon dioxide in to the atmosphere . Carbon dioxide is the main cause of global warming .
 Deforestation has reduced trees which convert C02 to oxygen . At the same time, deforestation has reduced the amount of oxygen .
 Greenhouse gases, including methane and fluorocarbon, trap heat in the atmosphere, raising global temperature . The gases trap heat, raise global temperature, raising the risk of climate change .
 The world community has been slow to awaken to the looming catastrophe . International cooperation for remedial action against the causes has been too weak so far so far .
 USA and Australia refused to sign the 1997 Kyoto Protocol which required 25 industrialised countries to reduce C02 emissions by 5 per cent below the 1990 level . The Kyoto Protocol required 25 nations to reduce their C02 levels by 5.5 per cent .
 The United States which is responsible for a large part of the pollution has since increased emissions by 10 per cent . The U.S. responsible for the large amount of pollution has increased emissions since 2007 .
 UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon visited the Arctic in December 2009 to witness first hand the changes wrought by global warming . Ban visited the region prior to the Copenhagen conference on Climate Change .
 Cooperation Accord set a target of limiting global warming to a maximum of 2 degrees Celsius over pre-industrial times . Instead it issued a nonbinding Cooperation Accord which set a limit of 2°C .
 US-President promoted a separate understanding among industrialized countries including China, Brazil, India, and South Africa promising to contain emissions . He held out a prospect of aid to developing countries for countering impact of climate change .
 The UN Climate Change secretariat projected a long road ahead to the next conference to be held in Mexico in November 2012 . The conference will take place in Mexico .
 Globalisation has knitted the world together and made humanity more interdependent than ever before . Globalisation, resulting from the gathering momentum of mass media, instant radio and video communications, spread of multinational corporations, expansion in international trade in goods and services .
 Developing countries particularly faced difficulties in responding to this central challenge . Developing nations particularly faced special difficulties in dealing with this challenge, experts say .
 Declaration called for broad and sustained efforts to create a shared future for humanity . It called for international cooperation for development and poverty eradication .
 Measures to be taken in order to realise the objectives were commitment to good governance within each country, and at the international level, transparency in financial, monetary and trading systems, and enhanced programmes of debt relief .
 Of course, public diplomacy to inform and influence opinion abroad has been an expanding field . Public diplomacy has been expanding field since the 1970s, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 IFIs and the United Nations have recognised corruption as a major obstacle to economic development . Corruption is a major problem for economic development in South Africa .
 In 2004, the UN General Assembly adopted an international convention on cooperation to eliminate corruption . The convention was adopted by the U.N. General Assembly .
 The parties will be required to assist one another in the prosecution of persons charged with crimes of corruption, seizing their assets and returning illicit funds to their countries . When it comes into force, after the requisite number of states have ratified it, the parties will have to assist each other in the
 Countries that attracted deposits into secret accounts are expected to reform banking laws . Countries that have historically attracted deposits to secret accounts will reform their laws .
 Meanwhile, the process of recovering illicit funds remains subject to numerous obstacles including denial of access to information, expensive litigation and interminable delays in court proceedings . The process is subject to many obstacles such as expensive litigation .
 Pakistan has also been engaged in efforts to develop regional cooperation with countries to its west and, more recently, in the South Asian region .
 ECO and SAARC are expected to become significant new components in the acceleration of development . Cooperation among developing countries is inherently problematic because their product range is limited and exports are often more competitive than complementary .
 ECDC and TCDC—economic and technical cooperation among developing countries, have so far proved to be of limited value . TCDC and ECDC are economic, technical cooperation .
 Even in the ASEAN region intra-trade remained a small fraction of their global exports' until economic development led to a broadening and sophistication of products that opened up possibilities for profitable exchange .
 Impulses toward cooperation in South Asia have been historically weak, primarily because of political discord and the existence of bitter disputes among the states of the region .
 Neither a common threat perception, such as that which actuated states of Western Europe to abandon old patterns of conflict, nor a shared vision of security through cooperation that motivated countries of South-East Asia .
 Fears founded in the political experiences of the peoples of the region are compounded by asymmetries of resources . The region's political experiences have been compounded by political and economic differences .
 India accounts for nearly three-quarters of the region's economic production and trade . India is the largest and the most industrialised country in the region . The region's economy is based in India .
 Conscious efforts have therefore to be made to ensure mutual and balanced exchange of costs and benefits . Conscious efforts must be made, says Dr. David Cameron .
 Bangladesh formally proposed that South Asian states begin negotiations for forming a regional forum of cooperation in 1980 . In 1980, Bangladesh proposed that S.A. states begin talks for forming regional cooperation .
 Nepal and Sri Lanka support the idea, but Pakistan does not . The idea was greeted with reiervation by Pakistan . Actively supported by Nepal, Sri Lanka and Nepal, it was also supported by Sri Lanka .
 Islamabad was apprehensive lest the forum be used by India to realise its dream of hegemony over the region . Islamabad was worried that India would use the forum as a tool for its hegemony .
 Its spokespersons publicly expressed the apprehension that the neighbours might gang up against India . India has expressed its fears that its neighbours might have attacked India . The Indian government is worried about the possibility of a nuclear strike .
 New Delhi was pleased about opportunities for expansion of its exports of industrial products to the neighbouring countries, but decided to assume a calculated posture of reluctance’ in order to undercut the argument that India would be the principal beneficiary of the proposal .
 Pakistan decided to defer to the preference of friendly countries in order to avoid offence to proponents and to mould the proposal so as to preclude damage . In the end, Pakistan decided not to engage in the proposal as it was intended to prevent offence .
 It was agreed that decisions should be taken on the basis of unanimity . It is agreed that the council should take decisions on a unanimous basis .
 Lengthy preparatory work went into the identification of areas for fruitful cooperation . Lengthy preparations were made to prepare for the project .
 The list was progressively expanded to encompass agriculture, rural development, telecommunications, meteorology, health and population activities, science and technology, education and tourism etc. The list has been progressively expanded .
 Cooperation in trade and industry was relegated in early years . Significantly, cooperation in trade was relegated to early years of cooperation .
 Some of the countries of the region wanted to gain experience, and to study the implications of cooperation in trade so that their economies would not be swamped . Some countries wanted to learn from each other's experience .
 The South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation was formally launched at a summit meeting at Dhaka in December 1985 . After four years of intensive preparation, the South Asian . Association for . Regional Cooperation formally launched in Dhaka, Dhaka .
 SAARC charter defined its aims of accelerating economic growth, social progress and cultural development in the member states . SAARC aims to accelerate economic growth and social progress .
 It also elaborated on the principles and the organisational structure of the association and the mandates of its various committees . The association is based in New York City .
 intra-regional trade was not included in the scope of the association until 1993 . In 1993, the association began to focus on trade between the U.S. and Europe .
 Trade cannot prosper if relations between countries are abnormal, experts say . Experience in other regions has testified to the fact that trade cannot prosper in the region .
 Tensions obstructed trade between western and socialist countries during the Cold War . Tensions were high during the 1950s and 1960s when tensions were high .
 Trade between Arab countries and Israel remained abnormal for decades due to the Palestine question . Trade between Israel and Arab countries remained abnormal due to Palestine issue .
 The USA has used trade as a foreign policy lever against China, Cuba, Iran, Libya, Sudan, Sudan and Syria . The U.S. has used it as a tool to use against China and Cuba, Cuba .
 Trade policies of the countries of South Asia were at odds . Besides, the trade policies of South Asian countries are at odds with each other's .
 India, the biggest exporter in intra-regional trade, followed a restrictive import policy . India is the biggest exporting country in the world, followed by restrictive import policies .
 Its long-time emphasis on autarchic development, or self-sufficiency, excluded the import of consumer goods generally .
 The policy denied access to the Indian market for the primary manufactures produced by the other countries of the region . This policy denied the access to India market for primary manufactures .
 With its wide range of products, India sought to penetrate the markets of neighbouring countries . On the other hand, the government sought to enter the markets .
 Trade with India evinced the colonial characteristics of exchange between raw materials and manufactured goods . As a result of the colonial nature of trade with India, trade with the British Empire was largely dominated by raw materials .
 Pakistan spent a million dollars in 1981 on participation in the Indian trade fair in New Delhi . Pakistan spent the same amount of money in the 1980s .
 The pavilion exhibiting almost the entire range of Pakistani products attracted record crowds of curious visitors . Pakistani products were exhibited at the event .
 An embryonic system of preferences was instituted after the members agreed to establish the South Asian Preferential Trading Area . It envisaged reciprocal exchange of concessions in customs duties .
 SAARC leaders evaluated the results of regional cooperation as disappointingly meagre . In 1997, the leaders of the SAARC region evaluated the region's cooperation as disappointing . SAARC is one of the most powerful countries in the world .
 SAARC members decided to establish the South Asian Free Trade Area through exchanging concessions . At the SAARC summit in January 2004, members agreed to establish a free trade area .
 The framework envisaged a graduated programme for the promotion of trade and economic cooperation through exchanging concessions . The Least Developed Countries —Bangladesh, Bhutan and Maldives—to be allowed a longer period for the realisation of the objective .
 Non-LDCs would bring down the rate to 20 per cent in two years and LDCs to 30 per cent . Non- LDC's rate would be brought down to 20-20 per cent by two years .
 They would further reduce tariffs to between 0-5 per cent, non-LDCs in five years,e.e. by 1 January 2013, and LDCs by 8 years . They would also reduce tariffs for non-member countries in eight years and by 2016 .
 The agreement provided for each country to maintain a sensitive list of goods for which tariff reductions would be subject to negotiations . Each country would maintain a list of sensitive goods .
 The agreement on SAFTA provided a practical framework with different timetables for free trade . SAFTA provides a framework with differentiated timetables .
 It recognised that trade liberalisation has to be achieved in a manner beneficial to all members . Trade liberalisation must be achieved for all members of the union .
 Assimilation of lessons in other regions would facilitate a realistic solution . Assimilation would be necessary to solve the problem, says the author .
 European Union developed well-considered safeguards to prevent shocks to their economies . To enable less developed countries to adjust to integration, the EU developed safeguards to preclude shocks .
 Subsidies were agreed for agriculture and particular core was taken to shield, assist and strengthen states with vulnerable economies . Subs were agreed to protect vulnerable states from economic downturn .
 Greece, Portugal and Spain, for instance, were allowed sufficient lead time during which they enjoyed unilateral duty-free access to the markets of the more advanced countries . Spain, Portugal, Spain, Greece and Portugal were given enough lead time to prepare for the market .
 EU aid pledged to countries of Eastern Europe admitted to the EU in 2004 . Aid has been pledged to those of Eastern European admitted to EU .
 The difficulties of promoting economic cooperation among developing countries have been illustrated in the excruciatingly slow progress of the Economic Cooperation Organization . The difficulties are illustrated by the slow progress made by the ECO .
 The ten nations share bonds of history and culture . ECO meetings are distinguished by fraternal cordiality and a unanimous desire for economic integration . The ten countries share a desire to remove trade barriers and develop infrastructure for intra-regional trade .
 The seven new members are keen for development of communications and transport links giving them access to the sea . The seven members are particularly keen for developing communications and . transport links .
 The first summit meeting of the expanded ECO, held in Tehran in February 1992, endorsed the goal of eliminating all tariffs and non-tariff barriers among the members . Underlined the importance of the development of cooperation in transport and communications .
 Progress towards the agreed goal has been slow mainly due to lack of investment capital . Progress is expected to be slow due to the lack of funds from investors .
 Earlier decisions placed a high priority on communications, transport, oil and regional linkages in energy and minerals . The government has placed a focus on communications and transport .
 In February 1993, the Quetta Plan of Action elaborated proposals for enlarged cooperation . The Quetta plan of action was elaborated in February 1993 .
 Agreements on transit trade and visa simplification were signed at the Islamabad summit in March 1995 . Agreements were also signed on a number of other issues .
 The first major step towards integration was the launch of the ECO Trade Agreement in 2003 . The ECO trade agreement was launched in 2003 and signed in 2007 .
 The highest tariff rates will be reduced from 15 to 10 per cent in five years . The deal requires ratification by five members of the European Economic Community .
 In 2002 intra-regional trade amounted to $11 billion, or 5.7 per cent of their global trade, and comprised mainly of petroleum products . In 2002, intra-Regional trade in the Middle East was $11billion .
 With sizeable natural and human resources, the region has a promising potential . The region has sizeable natural resources, with sizeable human resources .
 Turkey, benefiting from commitment to modernisation and market access to Europe, has achieved rapid progress in industry . Turkey's economy has been hit by a wave of rapid growth in recent years . The country has seen a rise in modernisation in recent decades .
 Iran has made productive use of its large oil revenues for economic development . Iran, too, is self-reliant, and has made use of it to develop its own economy .
 Kazakhstan has begun to receive enough revenue from oil exports to become a middle-income country . Kazakhstan is expected to become an oil-rich middle-class nation in the near future .
 Azerbaijan, a traditional oil exporter, and Turkmenistan, with vast reserves of natural gas, should also achieve better living standards . Azerbaijan is one of two countries with vast oil reserves in the region .
 Iran stands next with a GDP of $113 billion, and a per capita annual income of $1,720 . Iran has the highest per capita income in the world, with $1.720 .
 Pakistan’s GDP of $95 billion comes next in size in size of the economy . But its per capita income is lower than that of Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan . Pakistan's GDP is also lower than Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan .
 The Central Asian Republics have good communication and transport links to the north . Central Asia Republics are known for their good transport links and good communication links .
 China has connected its rail system with the Central Asian network . China has also linked its rail network with Central Asian networks . Also, China has set up its own rail network .
 Iran completed the MeshadSarakhs-Tagen rail link with the Central Asian railway network via Turkmenistan to Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan to Kazakhstan . Iran also established a Trans Asian Railway main line from Almaty to Istanbul for passenger and freight traffic via Syria
 The plan to connect the Iranian and Pakistan railways, first agreed under the RCD, remains on paper . The Iranian and Pakistani railways were first agreed to connect under the agreement .
 Iran has not built the Kerman-Zahidan link nor has Pakistan improved the track from Quetta . Pakistan has not improved the Qetta-Kermanan link .
 For the benefit of through trade to Central Asia and Europe, Pakistan would also need to develop rolling stock to facilitate transfer of wagons off wheels for the direct transport of goods and passengers .
 The shortest and most economical route to and from Central Asia is via Afghanistan and Pakistan . But the requisite resources are not in sight for the construction of roads from Gwadar to the north .
 The economy of the Karakorum Highway for trade access for the CARs to Pakistani ports is highly problematic . The CARs have been unable to reach Pakistani ports in the past .
 Transport via this route would incur heavy freight costs . Passing through high mountains, transport via high mountains could incur heavy costs .
 Progress on Torkham-Jalalabad, Kabul-Mazar-i-Sharif and Kandahar-Spin Baidak roads will relieve the problem . In the short term, progress is needed to relieve congestion, says Afghan official .
 Financially, the most feasible projects for early implementation are gas pipelines . The most feasible project is to build a pipeline network of gas pipelines across the country .
 Iran-Pakistan-India pipeline is under active consideration since Pakistan decided in December 1999 to allow transit . An Iran-India-Iran pipeline has been under consideration since then .
 Investment capital is shy however, and revival of the project is dependent on assessments of political stability in the region . Investment capital remains a problem for the project .
 When the projects are implemented, the transit countries will earn substantial transit fees . Transit countries will be able to earn substantial fees from the projects .
 In addition to global efforts to eliminate restrictive trade practices, groups of states have established regional cooperation to promote trade and economic cooperation .
 A favourable global and regional environment is an important factor in accelerating economic progress, though there is no substitute for appropriate national policies . China, South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and India have seen rapid economic growth in recent decades .
 Increased investment in the development of natural and human resources, expansion of manufacturing industries for production of quality goods at competitive prices, have been key components of their success .
 Pakistan, too, has embarked on the assimilation of proven growth strategies . In 2005, Pakistan achieved a record 8. per cent growth .
 An esUmated 800,000 people of the minority Tutsi and moderate Hutu tribes were massacred in Rwanda . An esumated 800-000 people were killed in Rwanda in 1994 .
 A Serb militia segregated 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica and massacred them in cold blood . Serb militias segregated the men and women and boys from Muslim Muslims . Serbs were responsible for the massacre of 8,500 Muslim men, boys and women .
 Hudood laws relate to crimes of extra-marital sex and consumption of alcohol by Muslims . Hudood law relates to crimes such as extra marital sex and alcohol consumption in Muslims .
 Intra-ASEAN trade was estimated to amount to a quarter of their global trade . Intra AAN trade is estimated to be worth around $1.5 billion a year .
 This figure includes, however, intra-regional re exports and petroleum, each about 10 per cent 9.9 per cent .
 Years later, an Indian foreign secretary told the author that New Delhi had assumed the posture of calculated reluctance mainly to undercut Pakistan’s assumption of Indian enthusiasm . Years afterwards, an India foreign secretary said the author .
 Dr Ashfisque H Khan, ‘Trade and Regional Economic Cooperation', The News, 13 April 1998 . Khan: 'Trade and regional Economic Cooperation' Khan: ‘Trilateral Economic Cooperation is a model for the future of the world .
 The improved targets were agreed at the Duahanbe summit in September 2004 . These improved targets have been agreed at a summit in 2004 .
 The 2003 agreement provided for reducing tariffs to 15 per cent in eight years . The 2003 deal was agreed to reduce the tariff to 15% for eight years in return for a reduction in tariffs .
 Sabaat ek taghayyur ko hai zamaney mein . Chapter 24 Policy in a Changing World . Policy in the Changing World is published by the UN .
 Ailama Iqbal: A state’s foreign policy adapts, as it must, to the flux in world affairs in order to safeguard independence and integrity . A state's foreign policy protects the right of the nation to live in peace and security, promote the legitimate aspirations
 Past evolutions in Pakistan’s foreign policy reflected adjustments to the imperatives of the changing global and regional environment . Pakistan's foreign policy has evolved in response to the changes in the world and region .
 The process can be expected to continue as the world power structure changes and new priorities claim attention requiring new policy emphasis .
 Knowledge of the history of past transformations in international relations and global power structure should be useful in forming an objective perspective on Pakistan’s foreign policy .
 A palpable exuberance was in the air after the establishment of the United Nations in 1945 . Nations looked forward to international cooperation for consolidation of peace and security and promotion of economic development .
 The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States of America were motivated by contradictory ideologies and pursued clashing strategies . The optimism proved ephemeral as the two most powerful states pursued contradictory ideologies .
 The Soviet Union believed in a world revolution, dictatorship of the proletariat and socialist ownership of the means of production . It believed in the Soviet Union's socialist ownership .
 The ideological rivalry and contest for influence in world affairs between the two global powers triggered the Cold War . The Cold War divided the world into opposing power blocs which all but paralyzed the U.N. Security Council .
 Abuse of veto power by permanent members of the Security Council obstructed decisions on international disputes . Abuse of the veto power obstructed decision to make international disputes, the UN says .
 As a result, major international issues such as the Palestine question and Kashmir dispute festered, war broke out in the Korean Peninsula, Vietnam and Algeria . Vietnam, Algeria and a number of countries in Africa suffered agony .
 The Doomsday Clock is perilously close to the midnight hour . Tension between the two superpowers with massive arsenals of weapons of mass destruction pushed the Doomsday Clock .
 The collapse of the Soviet system in 1991 brought the contest of ideologies to a close . The sudden and spectacular, if unforeseen, collapse was unexpected .
 American scholar Francis Fukuyama argued that democracy and market economy had finally triumphed as the most satisfactory political and economic systems . For the first time in history in history the world community could look forward to a new era of peace and cooperation .
 A world fed up with centuries of divisive debate and confusing controversies on isms hoped he was right . The world hoped he would be right .
 Apartheid regime in South Africa reversed policy conceding equal rights to the majority black people . East European countries and nations formerly under Soviet rule recovered sovereignty, Germany was reunited .
 Global tensions abated, agreements were signed on reduction of weapons of mass destruction, the Doomsday Clock was turned back .
 As Yugoslavia began to disintegrate Serbs unleashed ‘ethnic cleansing’ of Muslims in Bosnia . Serbs were responsible for 'ethnic cleansing' of Muslim Muslims in the country . Serb's ethnic cleansing of Muslims began in Yugoslavia in 1992 .
 The United Nations now hoped to fulfil its envisioned role to usher in a new and more equitable international order . The U.N. hoped to achieve the envisioned role of ushering a new world order .
 The declaration was particularly notable for the pledge of cooperation in order to achieve Millennium Development Goals .
 To make the situation worse, ill-advised responses of some Western countries triggered a wave of Islamophobia, writes CNN.com's Peter Bergen.com.com .
 Bush administration decision to invade Iraq on trumped up charge was a serious setback to the millennial hopes . The Bush administration invaded Iraq on a trumped-up charge .
 Decent opinion even in countries allied with the U.S. was aghast at Washingtons contempt for the United Nations Charter . The U.N. Charter was a matter of principle .
 World opinion horrified by the colossal destruction of life and economic assets wrought by the U.S. invasion . World opinion was horrified by . The invasion .
 Hundreds of thousands of innocent people were killed and millions of Iraqis were displaced from their homes . Millions of Iraqis have been displaced since 2003 .
 The Muslim world was outraged by the apparent crusade of the US-led West . Muslim world is outraged at the 'anti-Muslim' West .
 The threat of forcible regime change’ prompted premonitions of primeval insecurity and neo-imperialism once again . ‘The threat of . forcible . regime change' prompted pre-monmonitions .
 The United States remains a military and economic superpower with a GDP of $14. trillion . The global power hierarchy has undergone spectacular changes since the Second World War .
 Japan and Germany, destroyed during the war, have become the world’s most affluent states . Germany and Japan, destroyed in WWII, are now the world's most affluent countries .
 The steepest rise in the global power hierarchy has been achieved by the People’s Republic of China .
 China has maintained about 10 per cent annual growth rate since 1979 . Deng Xiao-ping launched it on a new, more pragmatic economic policy in 1979 . Since 1979, when its great leader Deng Xianping launched its new economic policy, China's growth rate has remained steady .
 With high growth rates, South Korea, Brazil and India are now among the top ten economies in the world as is the Russian Federation . Brazil, India and South Korea are also among the world's top three economies .
 Having achieved rapid economic reconstruction in recent years, the country has a GDP of a trillion dollars . It has achieved rapid reconstruction and achieved rapid prosperity in recent decades .
 With the second largest arsenal of strategic weapons it remains a superpower . The US remains the world's second largest superpower .
 Military power has always been a prime factor in world politics . Self-defence is a condition for survival for states threatened by expansionist neighbours . Self defence is a vital part of survival for countries threatened by neighbours .
 The history of rise and fall of Great Powers also testifies to the importance of sustained technological progress and economic modernization for power and influence in the world .
 The Ottoman, Mughal and Ming empires fell because they failed to maintain commensurate economic strength . Seventeenth century Great Powers fell because of their lack of economic strength.
 In contrast, nations that fostered science and technology have risen in power and international prestige . Nations that foster science and develop their human resources have gained power and prestige .
 East Asian Tigers which set a record of fast-track economic and social modernisation are envied . Their efficient strategies are emulated by other states keen for extrication from stagnation and poverty .
 Turkey, and Vietnam are among countries that have graduated out of the lowincome group . Turkey, Vietnam, and Turkey, are among those who graduated from the low income group .
 Group that has achieved a dramatic rise in international influence comprises states that have harnessed large revenues from export of oil and gas for economic and social modernization .
 Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Qatar and Oman have achieved a position of respect and influence in the comity of nations . The UAE, Kuwait and Qatar are among the countries in the Middle East .
 A welcome consequence of the rise of a large number of countries in economic and military power and influence is the dilution of the influence of Great Powers in world affairs . The rise of the number of nations in power is a welcome consequence .
 Permanent members of the Security Council are increasingly reluctant to abuse their veto power to block Security Council resolutions that command wide support in the comity of nations . Permanent members have increasingly been reluctant to use veto power in the past .
 The U.S. continues to submit to dictation by the powerful Israeli lobby at home . So far the United States has resisted the trend and continues to resist the trend .
 The guiding principle has been steadfast adherence to the aims of safeguarding political independence and territorial integrity of the state, and promoting economic and social development .
 The policy has been adjusted from time to time in light of changes in the global and regional environment . The policy is now being adjusted to reflect the changing environment in the world .
 The recapitulation of the factors that motivated decisions at crucial junctures should be useful for realistic analysis and objective understanding of foreign policy .
 With hindsight, it's possible to form a fair opinion about the wisdom of past decisions . With hindsight it is possible to view past decisions with a fair view .
 Even Great Powers with larger intelligence and intellectual resources have committed blunders . If the policies have not always proved successful or wise, the reader should bear in mind that decision makers, too, are liable to err .
 Foresight as perfect as hindsight would have saved the U.S. from Vietnam and Iraq . The Soviet Union from the fatal drain of human and economic assets on empire building in Eastern Europe, confrontation with China .
 Its founding fathers were committed to principles of peaceful coexistence . Its founding father was committed to the principles of peace coexistence.
 The first major policy decision the Pakistan government made was necessitated by India’s refusal to respect the principles of the partition and transfer Pakistan's share of British India's assets, including ordnaice stores . Pakistan's armed forces of 50,000 men were left without weapons for defence
 The government, therefore, decided in October 1947 to approach the United States for a loan of two billion dollars ior defence procurement and economic development . The government decided to ask the U.S. for the loan of 2 billion dollars .
 Washington was surprised by the magnitude of the request but it was not unsympathetic and offered a modest amount for economic assistance . Washington offered a small amount of economic assistance to the Philippines .
 It was made because the United States was friendly and sympathetic and because it was the only major power that escaped economic destruction during the Second World War and was in a position to provide aid .
 Pakistan was not inimical to the Soviet Union though it was ideologically alien . Pakistan followed policies of interference in internal affairs and was antipathetic to the Soviets .
 The second major foreign policy decision was a consequence of United States strategy to build a military alliance in the Middle East for the defence of political stability and protection of the rich petroleum resources of the Gulf Region .
 Pakistani leaders decided to sign a defence agreement with the United States and joined SEATO in 1954, and the Baghdad Pact in 1955 . The Baghdad Pact was formed in 1955, when Pakistan signed the defence agreement .
 During 1954-62, Pakistan received $5 billion (about $20 bdlion in current prices) in economic aid and arms supplies . Pakistan received about $20 billion in military and economic aid during that period .
 Pakistan’s relationship with the United States came under increasing strain due to Washingtons decision to improve relations with neutral Iadia, and Islamabad's cooperation with China . Pakistan's relationship with U.S. relations with Pakistan have been strained due to the growing influence of China .
 After India’s border war with China in 1962, Washington provided it what Pakistan considered massive military aid . Pakistan's apprehension that tie weapons would be used against it, as these were in the 1965 war .
 The fourth turning point followed the defeat and disaster of 1971, when Pakistan reversed its policy of nuclear abstinence . Pakistan's policy of non-nuclear abstinence was reversed in 1971 .
 Secretary of Slate Kissingers' defence of Islamabad’s decision failed to restrain the United States government from opposing the French supply of a reprocessing plant to Pakistan, and imposing sanctions in 1979 .
 Pakistan’s relations with the United States continued to decline and deteriorate . Relations with the U.S. have been at low ebb since the 1960s . Pakistan has a long history of poor relations with America, including the Taliban .
 In 1979, students set fire to the United States Embassy in Islamabad which cost the Government of Ibkistan over $30 million as it had to pay for the reconstruction of the embassy . The government had to rebuild the embassy after the fire .
 The superpower advanced to Pakistan’s border and exposed Pakistan to the nightmare of the IndoSoviet nutcracker . The superpowers advanced to the border . Pakistan was exposed to a nightmare of being hit by the Nutcracker.
 Pakistan accepted U.S. cooperation and assistance from the United States . After initial hesitation, Pakistan accepted United States cooperation .
 Bush invoked the Presslerlaw again to slap sanctions on Pakistan, cut off economic and military assistance and even withhold the transfer of F-16 aircrafts . This phase of the revived alliance suddenly ended in 1990, when President Bush invoked Pressler Law again .
 Pakistan was left in the lurch with heavy burdens, due to the civil war in Afghanistan, and the Kalashnikov culture . Pakistan has suffered heavy burdens due to spread of weapons to civilians, including the spread of guns to civilians .
 Islamabad’s recognition of the Taliban regime, nuclear tests in 1998 and a military coup in 1999 led to international isolation . Islamabad's recognition of Taliban regime led to isolation from the world .
 Pakistan’s decision to join the world community in the war against terrorism brought it back into the international mainstream . Pakistan desperately needs stronger support from major countries of the world, which it desperately needs to fight Al Qaeda .
 All the policy decisions were made autonomously by Pakistani leaders, says Hussain Hussain . Hussain says Pakistan's leaders made their own assessment of Pakistan’s national interests . Hussain: Pakistan's foreign policy decisions are made in the light of the country's interests .
 In some cases assumptions and projections proved erroneous and counter-productive . In some of the world's most important decisions were made in the wrong way .
 In judging the past the reader should, however, make allowance for the fact that future is opaque and humans are fallible . The reader should also make allowance that future will be opaque .
 Even Great Powers with think-tanks staffed by scholars can commit blunders . The United States did by intervening in Vietnam and Iraq, and the Soviet Union in even more numerous instances .
 The reader should examine situations objectively and see through superficial criticisms . Readers should be able to see through the superficial criticisms of the situation .
 Pakistan desperately needed to strengthen its military and economic sinews in order to consolidate the state . Criticism that nonalignment would have better served Pakistan’s interests ignores the fact that Pakistan desperately needs to strengthen military, economic and military .
 Collective security is an obvious and legitimate means for defence for states faced with an existential threat from a neighbour intent on exploiting power disparity . Collective security can be a legitimate means of defence for countries facing existential threats, says author .
 Pakistan's alliance policy was on the whole beneficial for Pakistan . Analysis of costs and benefits of alliances in Chapter 6 shows, it shows .
 Pakistan did not hesitate to give first priority to its own strategic imperatives . When the costs were unacceptable, Pakistan gave it first priority . Pakistan has a history of Pakistanising Pakistanising .
 Pakistan remained steadfast in pursuit of its policy of developing strategic cooperation with China . U.S. pressures and penalties imposed by the United States, Pakistan says .
 Pakistan persisted in development of the strategic deterrence despite U.S. sanctions and cut-off of economic assistance and defence cooperation . Similarly, Pakistan continued to develop its strategic deterrence .
 Pakistan should or should not have decided to oppose Sonet intervention in Afghanistan in 1979 is a legitimate question for posterity . Pakistan should have opposed Sonet's intervention in the country in 1979 .
 The decision to support Afghan resistance entailed colossal costs not only due to influx of millions of refugees and proliferation of the Kalashnikov culture . The blowback of extremism and terrorism that continue to pose a serious threat to the security of our stoic nation .
 Pakistani policy makers failed to anticipate the consequences of Pakistan's policy . Pakistan has been hit by a series of high-profile attacks on the Taliban .
 Islamabad's policy decision was made by Islamabad, not at the behest of any foreign power . It must be borne in mind, however, that the decision was not made by any foreign policy makers .
 In 1979 Washington had little influence in Islamabad as bilateral relations were strained due to nuclear sanctions imposed by the U.S. administration . In 1979 the United States imposed nuclear sanctions on Pakistan .
 Washington was in no position to influence Islamabad until mid-1981 when an acceptable security framework for bilateral cooperation to support the Afghan liberation struggle was worked out with Reagan administration .
 Until then Islamabad had received no communication from Washington . The chapter concludes .
 It anticipated the likely U.S. reaction and the global consensus, and decided to join the world community in the fight against terrorism, it says .
 "The passage of time has served to illustrate the correctness of that policy decision," he says .
 Elected leaders have endorsed the policy and even decided to intensify military operations in the struggle against terrorism . The policy has been endorsed by the government .
 Of course, not all policy decisions made by Pakistani leaders proved beneficial . Pakistan has been plagued by corruption, terrorism and terrorism .
 With the benefit of hindsight it is easy to identify mistakes of assumption and analysis . With the help of hindsight, there are many mistakes made in the past .
 "What is important for the future is to benefit from the lessons that have been learnt and avoid repetition," says the former footballer . "The future is important to avoid repetition. What is important is that we learn from our mistakes," he says .
 The nation has the will to struggle for the realisation of the founding fathers’ vision of a moderate and progressive Muslim state . The nation will struggle for realising the vision of the first Muslim state, writes Ahmed .
 A provident foreign policy is no more than a part of the salutary strategy for a better future, says David Cameron . The UK has been in the midst of a crisis in the Middle East .
 The Shimla Agreement was signed by India and Pakistan in 1972 . The agreement was meant to end the conflict and confrontation that have hitherto maned their relations .
 Government of India and Pakistan have agreed as follows as follows . The two countries have agreed to work together to achieve this objective . Pakistan and India have agreed on the issue .
 The principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations shall govern the relations between the two countries. That the principles of the charter of the U.N. shall govern relations . That is the principle and purpose of the .
 That the two countries are resolved to settle their differences by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations or by any other peaceful means mutually agreed upon .
 Pending the final settlement of any of the problems between the two countries, neither side shall unilaterally alter the situation . Neither side shall prevent the organization, assistance or encouragement of any act detrimental to the maintenance of peaceful and harmonious relations .
 The pre-requisite for reconciliation, good neighbourliness and durable peace between them is a commitment by both the countries to peaceful co-existence, respect for each others territorial integrity and sovereignty and non-interference .
 That they shall always respect each others national unity, territorial integrity, political independence and sovereign equality . That they should respect each other's national unity and sovereignty .
 That in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, they will refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of each other, they say . That is according to the Charter .
 Both the Governments will take all steps within their power to prevent hostile propaganda directed against each other . Both governments will take steps to prevent the spread of hostile propaganda .
 Both countries will encourage the dissemination of such information as would promote the development of friendly relations between them . The United States and the Netherlands will share the information .
 Steps will be taken to resume communications, postal, telegraphic, sea, land, land and land, including border posts, and air links including overflights .
 The agreement was signed in 1972 . It was intended to promote travel facilities for the nationals of the other country .
 Trade and cooperation in economic and other agreed fields will be resumed as far as possible . The two countries have agreed to resume bilateral trade and economic cooperation .
 In this connection delegations from the two countries will meet from time to time to work out the necessary details .
 Indian and Pakistani forces shall be withdrawn to their side of the international border . Indian forces will be withdrawn from international border, says Pakistani PM .
 In )ammu and Kashmir, the line of control resulting from the ceasefire of December 17, shall be respected by both sides without prejudice to the recognized position of either side . The ceasefire was agreed on December 17 .
 Neither side shall seek to alter it unilaterally, irrespective of mutual differences and legal interpretations . Neither side will seek to change it unilaterally .
 Both sides undertake to refrain from the threat or use of force in violation of this line . Both sides will refrain from using force against each other . The United States and the United Kingdom will not engage in further negotiations .
 The withdrawals shall commence upon entry into force of this agreement and shall be completed within a period of 30 days thereof . The withdrawals will be completed in 30 days . The withdrawal period will be 30 days long .
 This agreement will be subject to ratification by both countries in accordance with their respective constitutional procedure . It will come into force with effect with effect from the date on which the instruments of ratification are exchanged .
 Both Governments agree that their respective Heads will meet again at a mutually convenient time in the future . Representatives of the two sides will meet to discuss further the modalities and arrangements for the of repatriation of prisoners of war and civilian internees .
 Indira Gandhi Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was Prime Minister of India and President of Pakistan . She was the first female prime minister of the two countries . Zulfar was assassinated by the assassination of the Shah Shah Shah Muhammad Ali Khan in 1973 .
 Final draft agreement on bilateral relations between the Government of India and Pakistan is reached . Agreement is based on a draft agreement signed by the Indian and Pakistani governments . Pakistan and India signed an agreement in 2007 .
 That the two countries are resolved to settle their difierences by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations or by any other peaceful means mutually agreed upon between them . That is not the case for the United States .
 Pending the final settlement of any of the problems between the two countries, neither side shall unilaterally alter the situation . Both shall prevent organization, assistance or encouragement of any acts detrimental to the maintenance of peaceful and harmonious relations .
 That the basic issues and causes of conflict which have bedevilled the relations between the two countries for the last 25 years shall be resolved by peaceful means . That the . issues and . causes of . conflict which are . bedeviled by . the . relations . between the . two
 Both Governments will take all steps within their pawed to prevent hostile propaganda directed against each other .
 Steps will be taken to resume communications, postal, telegraphic, sea. land, including border pasts, and air links, including over-flights . Steps will also be made to resume air and sea communications .
 Appropriate steps shall be taken to provide travel facilities to the nationals of the other country . The other country will be provided travel facilities .
 Trade and co-operation in academic and other agreed fields will be resumed as for as possible .
 In this connection delegations from the two countries will meet from time to tone to work out the necessary details . Delegations from both countries are expected to meet regularly .
 In lammu and Kashmir, the line of control resulting from the ceasefire of December 17, 1971 shall henceforth be respected by both sides as a Line of Peace . The ceasefire was a ceasefire between the two sides of the border in 1971 .
 Both sides undertake to refrain from the threat or the use of force in violation of this Line . Both sides also undertake not to use force against them .
 Minor adjustments to the Line of Peace in Jammu and Kashmir may be made by mutual agreement . Minor adjustments may be necessary by both sides to make the border more rational .
 A joint body composed of an equal number of representatives, nominated by each Government, will be appointed to establish ground rules and supervise the effective observance of the Line of Peace and the rest of the border between the two countries .
 The withdrawals shall commence upon entry into force of this Agreement in accordance with the ground rules evolved by the above-mentioned joint body and shall be completed within a period of 30 days thereof . The withdrawals will commence upon entering into force .
 This agreement will be subject to ratification by both countries in accordance with their respective constitutional procedures . It will come into force with effect with effect from the date on which the Instruments of Ratification are exchanged . The agreement is subject to both countries' respective constitutional .
 Both Governments agree that their respective Heads will meet again at a mutually convenient time in the future . Representatives of the two sides will meet to discuss further the modalities and arrangements for the establishment of durable peace .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan affirm their resolve to respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of each other and refrain from interfering in each others internal affairs .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan regard as totally inadmissible recourse to war for the solution of international problems . Pakistan and India renounce the threat or use of force in their mutual relations .
 In pursuance of this pledge, they undertake to settle all issues bilaterally and exclusively by peaceful means .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan further agree that joint inspection teams shall be established to ensure effective implementation of agreement entered into pursuant to this Article . Joint inspection teams will be established .
 Joint inspection teams will submit their report from time to time to the two Governments . The joint inspection teams are expected to submit their findings to the Governments .
 Both sides agree to enter into a Protocol for the implementation of this Article which shall be an integral part of this Treaty . The Protocol will be part of the Treaty .
 Both countries shall actively encourage the dissemination of information to promote the development of friendly relations and cooperation .
 The Government of India and Pakistan undertake to identify develop areas of cooperation and common interest between tbeir two people .
 In order achieve this objective, they shall establish joint commissions or their joint bodies . Areas of cooperation may develop on a firm and long-term basis for mutual benefit, they say .
 Both sides agree to enter into Protocols which shall be integral parts of this Treaty . Protocols will be part of the Treaty .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan regard commercial, economic and cultural ties as an important and essential element in strengthening bilateral relations .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan agree to facilitate visits of nationals of one country to the other through mutually agreed routes for personal, commercial, religious, cultural, cultural and other reasons . Pakistan and India agree that visits should be facilitated by mutual consent .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan agree that with a view to the effective implementation of this Treaty, periodic consultations shall be held between the two countries .
 It will continue to be in force for a period of ten years in the first instance . It will be in place for a ten-year period .
 It shall continue to be in force thereafter until it is terminated by either party by giving to the other six months’ notice in writing in writing . The agreement will continue until the other party gives six months of notice .
 In WITNESS WHEREOF, the representatives duly authorised by their respective Governments have signed this Treaty in two original texts, each of which is authentic . Each of the original texts are authentic .
 The agreement reached at such discussion shall be incorporated in the form of Articles . Articles at an appropriate place in this Treaty, and shall constitute an integral part of this Treaty . To complete the text of the Treaty, the agreement reached in such an article will be incorporated into Articles .
 The Government of India and the Government of Pakistan are resolved that that the two countries put an end to the conflict and confrontation that have hitherto marred their relations . The two countries are resolved to work for the promotioh of a friendly and harmonious relationship .
 The two Governments reaffirm the universal and unconditional validity of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations . They declare that the breach of these principles cannot be justified in any circumstances whatsoever .
 The two Governments shall in their bilateral relations adhere to the principles set out in the Declaration on the Strengthening of International Security adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 16 December 1970 . The Declaration was accepted by both India and Pakistan .
 In accordance with that Declaration, they reaffirm that they will respect each other’s national unity, territorial integrity, political independence and sovereign equality . Not interfere in any manner whatsoever in each other's internal affairs; and fulfil in good faith the obligations assumed by them under the United Nations
 Any dispute between India and Pakistan will be settled by peaceful means such as negotiation, inquiry, mediation, conciliation, or arbitration or judicial settlement . Pakistan and India have been at odds for years .
 The two Governments will, as far as possible, avoid diversion of resources from development needs to defence purposes, keeping in view the principle of equal security .
 Both countries will encourage the dissemination of such information as would promote the development friendly relations between them . Both countries hope the information will promote friendly relations .
 Teams of experts from the two countries will meet from time to time to work out the necessary details . In this connection, teams of experts will meet with each other .
 This Agreement will be subject to ratification by both countries . It will come into force with effect with effect from the date on which the Instruments of Ratification are exchanged . The agreement will be ratified by both nations .
 The President of Pakistan has declared that this Agreement will require ratification by the National Assembly of Pakistan . The agreement will need to be ratified by Pakistan's parliament .
 The two Governments will resume diplomatic relations as from an agreed date . Also, the two Governments have agreed to resume relations .
 That the two countries will not use force for the settlement of any differences between them and resolve them exclusively by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations or by any other peaceful means .
 Pending the final settlement of any of the problems between the two countries, neither side shall unilaterally alter the situation . Neither side shall prevent the organization, assistance or encouragement of all acts detrimental to the maintenance of peaceful and harmonious relations .
 The pre requisite for reconciliation, good neighbourliness and durable peace between them is a commitment by both the countries to peaceful co-existence, respect for each others territorial integrity and sovereignty, non-interference .
 That the basic issues and causes of conflict which have bedevilled the relations between the two countries for the last 25 years shall be removed bilaterally and by peaceful means . That the . issues and . causes of . conflict which are . bedevillated by 25 years should be removed
 That they shall always refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of each other . That is always the case .
 Steps will be taken to resume communications, postal, telegraphic, sea, land and air links, including over-flights . Steps will include over-flight links, postal and telegraphy links, sea and land links .
 Both Governments agree that their respective heads will meet again at a mutually convenient time in the future . Officials of the two sides will meet to discuss further the modalities and arrangements for the establishment of durable peace and normalisation of relations .
 Composite Dialogue 1997-98 Joint Statement by Foreign Secretaries, Islamabad, 23 June 1997 Joint Statement .
 Both sides agreed to take all possible steps to prevent hostile propaganda and provocative actions against each other .
 The two Prime Ministers also carried out a detailed review of new developments in the region during the past few months .
 They expressed their determination to renew and reinvigorate efforts to secure such an environment . The group said they were determined to renew their efforts .
 They agreed that the peaceful settlement of all outstanding issues, including Jammu and Kashmir, was essential for this purpose . The two sides agreed that a peaceful settlement is essential for the purpose .
 The two sides undertake to provide each other with advance notification in respect of ballistic missile flight tests, and shall conclude a bilateral agreement in this regard .
 The two sides are committed to reducing risks of accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons under their control . They are fully committed to undertaking national measures to reducing risk of accidental use .
 The two sides undertake to notify each other immediately in the event of any accidental, unauthorized and unexplained incident that could create the risk of a fallout with adverse consequences for both sides, or an outbreak of a nuclear war between the two countries .
 The two sides shall identify/establish the appropriate communication mechanism for this purpose . The two parties will communicate with each other .
 The two sides shall continue to abide by their respective unilateral moratorium on conducting further nuclear test explosions unless either side, in exercise of its national sovereignty, decides that extraordinary event have jeopardized its supreme interests .
 The two sides shall conclude an agreement on prevention of incidents at sea in order to ensure safety of navigation by naval vessels, and aircraft belonging to the two sides . The agreement will be concluded by the end of the year .
 Prime Minister Vajpayee ‘visited Minar-e-Pakistan, Mausoleum of Allama Iqbal.’
 Leaders held discussions on the entire range of bilateral relations, regional cooperation within SAARC, and issues of international concern . The two leaders held discussions .
 Progress towards settlement of Jammu and Kashmir issue would be conducive towards normalization . Progress will further the establishment of a cooperative relationship in a mutually reinforcing manner . Progress would further establish a cooperative .
 There was progress in (he discussions towards an understanding of each other's viewpoints) There were progress in discussions towards understanding each other viewpoints. There were also progress in the discussions towards each others viewpoints.
 There was also recognition of the requirement of keeping the door open for future dialogue .
 Jammu and Kashmir; Peace and Security, including both conventional and nuclear CBMs; Terrorism and Drug T rafficking . Terrorism and drug tafficking. Peace and security. Jammu & Kashmir .
 Economic and Commercial Cooperation; Siachen; Wullar Barrage/TUlbul Navigation Project; Sir Creek; Promotion of friendly exchanges in various fields. Economic and commercial Cooperation . Siacen; Sianghen; Sullar . Barrage Project; Wular Bar
 The progress on these issues would be reviewed by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan and the External Affairs Minister of India at their meetings . Pakistan and India would discuss the progress on the issues .
 President and Prime Minister directed that all these issues be addressed purposefully, constructively and in an integrated manner, with a sense of urgency . The President and the Prime Minister further agreed and directed that the issues must be addressed .
 Annual Summit level meetings: Bi-annual meetings between the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Pakistan and Minister of External Affairs of India . Foreign Office consultations at the level of Foreign Secretaries .
 The two sides will support reactivation of the SAARC process and the holding of the Eleventh Summit on a date convenient to the host country and other Member States of the Association . SAARC will be reactivated and the meeting will take place in a convenient time .
 The President of Pakistan invited the Prime Minister of India to visit Pakistan . President of India invited him to meet with the Indian Prime Minister . President Hussain Nawaz Sharif has invited India's prime minister to Pakistan .
 President of Pakistan thanked the Prime Minister of India for the warm reception extended to Kim and hk ddcgntiofi d n r * n g stay . President of India thanked the PM of Pakistan for warm reception .
 Kashmir Pub. Cultural and Political from the Earliest Times to the Present Day, New Delhi . New Delhi: Kashmir Pubs. Kashmir Pub Pub. The Kashmir pub. The Pub.
 Pakistan's Relations with India, 1947-66, Pall Mall Press, London, 1967 . G.W. G.M.G.W., Pakistan's relations with India . Pakistan was one of India's most powerful statesmen .
 Farooqi, Bahauddin, 'Writ Petition' in Kashmir Holocaust—The Case Against India, ed., Khalid Hasan, Lahore, 1992, . Farooq: "Writ Petition" was written by Kashmiris .
 Pakistan's First Military Ruler, Sang-e-Mcel Publications, Lahore, 1994 . Pakistan's first Military Ruler was Pakistan's Prime Minister .
 Geelani, Syed Ali, Roodad-i-Qafs , Institute of Policy Studies, Islamabad, 1993, . Geelsani, . Syed . Ali, and Syed. Ali, wrote the book, "Roodadi-qafs
 Air Marshal M Asghar, The First Round, Indo-Pakistan War, is published by Islamic Information Services Ltd., London, 1979 . Air Marshal Asgar was killed in the first round of the war .
 Disenchanted Allies, Woodrow Wilson Center Press, Washington, D.C., 2001 . The book was published in 2001 by the Wilson Center .
 Longer V. Longer, V., The Defence and Foreign Policy of India, was published by Sterling Publishers, New Dehi, 1988 .
 Hafeez Malik, Hafeez, Soviet-Pakistan Relations and Post-Soviet Dynamics, Macmillan Press, London, 1994 . Malik was the author of the book, "Hafeez"
 McNamara, Robert S. McNamara wrote The Changing Nature of Global Security And Its Impact On South Asia, Washington, D.C, Washington Council on Non-Proliferation, 1992 .
 Pirzada, Syed Sharifuddin, The Pakistan Resolution, Pakistan Publications, Karachi, 1968, 1968 . Pakistan Resolution: Pakistan Resolution .
 Abdul Sattar, Abdul, 'Reducing Nuclear Dangers in South Asia—A Pakistani Perspective’ in The Non-proliferation Review, Monterey, Winter 1995 . Sattars: ‘Reducing nuclear risks in Asia is a Pakistani Perspective'
 Shahi, Agha, Pakistan's Security and Foreign Policy, 1988 . Shahi: Pakistan's security and foreign policy is Pakistan's national security policy . Pakistan's Foreign Policy was Pakistan's foreign policy .
 Zaidi, A Moin, and Shaheda Zaidai, eds., The Encyclopedia of Indian National Congress, S Chand 8t Co, New Delhi, 1976-1981 .
 Baghdad Pact, 54 Bandung Conference, 77, 92 Bangladesh.8, 135,144-5,152,158-9, 161.8 . Baghdad Pact was 54.8 Baghdad Pact . Bandung conference was held in Bandung .