 Western Samoa becomes independent from New Zealand in 1962 . January 1 Western Samoa is independent from the New Zealand nation .
 SEAL Team One is commissioned in the Pacific Fleet and SEAL Team Two is in the Atlantic Fleet . SEAL Team 1 is commissioned to serve in both the Pacific and the Atlantic . SEAL 2 is in charge of the Atlantic and Pacific Fleet .
 NAACP Executive Secretary Roy Wilkins praises United States President John F Kennedy's ""personal role"" in advancing civil rights . January 2 – NAACP executive secretary praises President Kennedy's "personal role" January 2 .
 January 10 – An avalanche on Nevado Huascarán in Peru causes 4,000 deaths . January 10, an avalanche in the country's largest city, caused 4,500 deaths . The death toll rises to 8,000 .
 Indonesian Army confirms that it has begun operations in West Irian . Indonesian Army confirmed that it had begun operations there .
 Albania allies itself with the People's Republic of China . January 13 – Albania joins forces with China . Albania is Albania's first country to ally with China in the past .
 Portugal abandons U.N. General Assembly due to the debate over Angola . January 15 – Portugal's decision to abandon the United Nations General Assembly is made after Angola's Angola .
 A counter-coup occurs in the Dominican Republic . The old government returns except for the new president . Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly is elected president .
 Organization of American States suspends Cuba's membership . January 22 – The OAS suspends its membership . Cuba is the only country in the U.S.
 Ranger 3 is launched to study the Moon; it later misses the Moon by 22,000 miles . January 26 – Ranger 3 was launched on a mission to the Moon . Ranger 3 later missed the moon by more than a million miles .
 The Soviet government changes all place names honoring Molotov, Kaganovich and Georgi Malenkov . January 27, the Soviet government changed place names to honor the three .
 March 8–12 – In Geneva, France and the Algerian FLN begin negotiations . France and Algeria begin negotiations with Algeria's FLN .
 March 15 – Katangan Prime Minister Moise Tshombe begins negotiations to rejoin the Congo . March 15 - Katangan PM begins negotiations with the Congo to join the country's re-joined Republic of Congo .
 France and Algeria sign an agreement in Évian-les-Bains ending the Algerian War . Algeria and France signed an agreement ending the war in the 1950s .
 Un premier amour, sung by Isabelle Aubret, won the Eurovision Song Contest 1962 for France . Un premier Amour was sung by Aubret . Isabelle Aubrets won the song in 1962 .
 March 19 – An armistice begins in Algeria; however, the OAS continues its terrorist attacks against Algerians . March 19 - Algeria's war with the Arab Spring began March 19 . March 20 – Algeria's Arab Spring was the first Arab Spring of the year .
 The Scandinavian States of the Nordic Council sign the Helsinki Convention on Nordic Co-operation . March 23 – The Scandinavian countries sign the convention on Nordic co-operation. March 23 is the date of the convention's signing .
 France shortens the term for military service from 26 months to 18 months . The term for service in France is now 18 months instead of 26 months . March 26 France is shortening the term to 18 .
 April 20 – New Orleans Citizens Co gives free 1-way ride to blacks to move North . The Hulk debuts with The Incredible Hulk #1 by Stan Lee and Jack Kirby .
 Norwich City beat Rochdale in the final of the English League Cup . Norwich City won the competition by beating the League One side . Norwich also won the League Cup for the first time in their history . Norwich won the cup in a 4-1 victory over Rochdal .
 Dayton Hudson Corporation opens first of its Target discount stores in Roseville, Minnesota . Dayton Hudson Corp. opens the first of the Target stores . Target stores will open in the city of Roseville in Minnesota .
 Juan Carlos of Spain marries the Greek Princess Sophia in Athens . Juan Carlos marries Princess Sophia of Spain .
 Milovan Djilas, former vice-president of Yugoslavia, given further sentence for publishing Conversations with Stalin . Former vice-presidents of Yugoslavia were jailed for publishing the book . Milovan was sentenced to two years in prison for his work on Stalin .
 May 22 – Continental Airlines Flight 11 crashes near Unionville, Missouri after in-flight detonation of a bomb near the rear lavatory . May 22 - Continental Airlines flight 11 crashes .
 Raoul Salan, founder of the Organisation armée secrète, is sentenced to life imprisonment in France . Salan was convicted of terrorism in 1998 . He was sentenced to a life sentence for his role in the terrorist organisation .
 Acker Bilk's Stranger On The Shore becomes the first British recording to reach number one in the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . Bilk is the first Brit recording to become number one .
 Negotiations between the OAS and the FLA lead to a real armistice in Algeria . Algeria was the first Arab Arab country to have a real war with the Arab Spring .
 Frank Morris, John Anglin and Clarence Anglin escape from Alcatraz Island prison . They escape with apparent success, with an apparent success . Clarence and Frank Anglin escaped from the prison .
 Although the men were never heard from again, there is evidence that they survived the attempt . There was to be sightings of them over the years, but they were never seen again .
 Students for a Democratic Society complete the Port Huron Statement . June 15 is June 15 . Students for the Democratic Society completes the statement . Students also complete a statement of support for the students .
 The OAS signs a truce with the FLN in Algeria, but a day later announces that it will continue the fight on behalf of French Algerians . June 17 The FLN announced that it would continue its fight against the OAS in Algeria . OAS: "We will continue
 The United States Supreme Court rules that photographs of nude men are not obscene, decriminalizing nude male pornographic magazines . The U.S. Supreme Court also decriminalizes nude male porn magazines .
 The United Lutheran Church in America, Finnish Evangelical Lutheran Church of America, American Evangelical Luther Church, and Augustana Evangelical . Lutheran Church . Church merge to form the Lutheran . Church .
 July 2 Charles de Gaulle accepts Algerian independence; France recognizes it the next day . France recognizes Algeria's independence from France .
 The first Walmart store, then known as Wal-Mart, opens for business in Rogers, Arkansas . The first store opened in the state of Arkansas in 1963 .
 Gay Byrne presents his first edition of The Late Late Show . July 6 – Irish broadcaster Gay Byrne present his first ever edition of the show . Gay Byrne will be the first Irish broadcaster to present the show on July 6 .
 Byrne goes on to present the talk show for 37 years, making it the longest running in the world . Byrne presents the show for the first time in 37 years . Byrne's talk show is the longest ever to be presented by a celebrity .
 Andy Warhol premieres Campbell's Soup Cans exhibit in Los Angeles July 9 . Warhol's Campbell's soup cans exhibit opens July 9 at the Warhol Museum Museum of Art in LA .
 AT&T's Telstar, the world's first commercial communications satellite, is launched into orbit July 10 . Telstar was launched into space and activated the next day . The Telstar is the first commercial satellite to launch into orbit and activated July 11 .
 Harold Macmillan dismisses 1/3 of his Cabinet in 'Night of the Long Knives' In what the press dubs ""the night of the long knives" 1/2 of his cabinet dismisses in what is known as the Night of the Knives .
 The First Annual Swiss & Wielder Hoop and Stick Tournament is held . July 19 is the First Annual Hoop & Stick Tournament . The tournament is held in the first place ever held .
 July 23 Telstar relays the first live trans-Atlantic television signal . July 23 is the date for the broadcast of Telstar's first live broadcast of the U.S. network .
 July 31 Algeria proclaims independence; Ahmed Ben Bella is the first President of Algeria . October 31 Algeria declares independence . July 31, Algeria was the first country to declare independence from Laos .
 Nelson Mandela arrested in Howick, South Africa, and charged with incitement to rebellion . Nelson Mandela was arrested on suspicion of inciting rebellion . Mandela was charged with inciting rebellion against the South African government .
 Marvel Comics publishes Amazing Fantasy#15, which features the first published appearance of the superhero character of Spider-Man, created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko . Amazing Fantasy #15 is published by Marvel Comics on August 10 .
 The Beatles drummer Pete Best is fired and replaced by Ringo Starr . Pete Best was fired from the band in 1964 . Ringo was replaced by Pete Best . The Beatles were the group's drummer .
 East German border guards kill 18-year-old Peter Fechter, as he attempts to cross the Berlin Wall into West Berlin . Peter was killed by border guards as he tried to cross Berlin Wall .
 A failed assassination attempt is made against French President Charles De Gaulle . August 22, a failed attempt was made against Charles de Gaulle in France . The assassination attempt took place in the early 1950s .
 Cuban exile terrorists fire at a hotel in Havana from a speedboat . August 24 – A group of armed Cuban exile . terrorists fire . at a Havana hotel . The attack was the first of its kind in Havana .
 Newly independent Algeria, by referendum, adopts a constitution . September 8, Algeria becomes a nation by referendum .
 Atlantic College opens it doors for the first time, marking the birth of the pioneering UWC educational movement . September 19 – Atlantic College is the first college to open its doors in the UWC's history .
 A border conflict between China and India erupts into fighting September 21 . September 21 a border conflict with China erupted into fighting in India's border region .
 Rachel Carson's book Silent Spring gave rise to the modern environmentalist movement . Carson's Silent Spring was published in 1945, giving rise to modern environmentalism . Carson wrote Silent Spring, a book that inspired modern environmentalists .
 Prime Minister Ahmed Ben Bella founds the first government in Algeria . September 28 – Prime Minister Ben Bella finds out first government of his country . September 30 – Ahmed found the first Algerian government .
 The Canadian Alouette 1, the first satellite built outside the United States and the Soviet Union, was launched from Vandenberg AFB in California on September 29 .
 October 14: Pictures of Soviet missile silos in Cuba, taken by U.S. spy planes . October 14, 1962: Pictures taken by United States spy planes. October 14 .
 Johnny Carson takes over as permanent host of NBC's Tonight Show . He would hold a post he would hold for 30 years .
 The French National Assembly censures the proposed referendum to sanction presidential elections by popular mandate . Prime Minister Georges Pompidou resigns, but President de Gaulle asks him to stay in office . The French Prime Minister's resignation was announced October 5 .
 Der Spiegel publishes an article about the Bundeswehr's poor preparedness; the Spiegel scandal erupts . October 8 The German magazine Der Spiegel published an article on the issue . The Spiegel scandal erupted after the article was published in Der Spiegel .
 October 9 – Uganda becomes independent within the Commonwealth of Nations . October 9 is Uganda's first anniversary of independence . Uganda is the first country to become an independent country .
 The Sino-Indian War, a border dispute involving two of the world's largest nations, begins October 10 . October 10 The Chinese government declares victory over the Indian people . The war is the first of its kind .
 A U-2 flight over Cuba over Cuba takes photos of Soviet nuclear weapons being installed . U.2 flight was over Cuba on Oct. 31, 1961 .
 President John F Kennedy announces to the nation the existence of Soviet missiles in Cuba . October 22 – In a televised address, President Kennedy announces that the missiles were in Cuba. October 22 .
 First confrontation between U.S. Navy and Soviet cargo vessel . First confrontation in history between the two countries .
 The fact that this deal was not made public makes it look like the Soviets have backed down . The deal was made public, making it look as though the Soviets had backed down on the deal .
 A referendum in France favors the election of the president by universal suffrage . A referendum is held in France every year . The French president is expected to be inaugurated in 2012 .
 The UN General Assembly asks the United Kingdom to suspend enforcement of the new constitution in Southern Rhodesia . But the constitution comes into effect on November 1 .
 November 1962 November 1 The Soviets begin dismantling their missiles in Cuba . November 1 November 1 1962 The Soviets began dismantling their missile bases in Cuba. November 1
 November 3 – The term ""personal computer"" is first mentioned by the media . November 3 - The term "personal computer" was first mentioned in the media. November 3 is November 3 .
 Franz Josef Strauß is relieved of his duties over the Spiegel scandal . The West German defense minister is accused of his alleged involvement in police action against the magazine .
 Saudi Arabia breaks off diplomatic relations with Egypt, following a period of unrest partly caused by the defection of several Saudi princes to Egypt . Several Saudi princes defected to Egypt after defections .
 The Norwegian government is forced to resign in the aftermath of this accident in August, 1963 . The government was forced to step down in the wake of the accident .
 President John F Kennedy dedicates Dulles International Airport in Washington, D.C. November 17 . President Kennedy dedicated Dulles Airport to the airport in honor of his son .
 U.S. President John F Kennedy ends the blockade of Cuba in response to the Soviet Union agreeing to remove its missiles from Cuba . President Kennedy ended the blockade in Cuba .
 Mies Bouwman starts presenting the first live TV-marathon fundraising show . The 23-hour fundraising show lasts 23 hours non-stop . The event is the first of its kind .
 French President Charles De Gaulle orders Georges Pompidou to form a government . November 27 – French president Charles De Gallle orders Pompido to form government . December 27 – President Charles de Gaulle is assassinated in Paris in March 1944 .
 Britain and France signed an agreement to develop the Concorde supersonic airliner . November 29 – An agreement was signed between the two countries to develop Concorde . The Concorde was the first aircraft to be developed by the two nations .
 Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield becomes the first American official to make a non-optimistic public comment on the war's progress . December 1962 December 2 – Vietnam War: After a trip to Vietnam at the request of U.S. President John F Kennedy, United States Senator Mike Mans
 Rainier III, Prince of Monaco revises the principality's constitution . He devolves some of his formerly autocratic power to several advisory and legislative councils . Monaco's constitution was created in 1903 .
 The North Kalimantan National Army revolts in Brunei, in the first stirrings of the Indonesian Confrontation .
 Julius Nyerere is president of Tanganyika, a republic within the Commonwealth . December 9 is the date of the first anniversary of the country's independence from Africa .
 It will skip a telecast in 1963, so beginning in 1964, first on CBS, then on NBC, and finally again on CBS . It will nearly always be telecast during the early part of the year until Turner Entertainment buys the rights in the 1990s .
 David Lean's epic film Lawrence of Arabia premieres in London December 10 . Peter O' Toole, Omar Sharif, Alec Guinness, Jack Hawkins, and Anthony Quinn star in the film .
 In West Germany, a coalition government of Christian Democrats, Christian Socialists, and Free Democrats is formed . December 11, 1963, in West Germany .
 U.S. spacecraft Mariner 2 flies by Venus, becoming the first probe to successfully transmit data from another planet . December 14 United States spacecraft flew by Venus for the first time .
 The Mona Lisa was assessed for insurance purposes at US$100 million . The painting toured the U.S. for several months before it was sold .
 The Louvre chose to spend the money that would have been spent on the insurance premium on security instead . However, the Louvre has spent the money on security .
 Britain acknowledges the right of Nyasaland to secede from the Central African Federation . December 19 – Britain acknowledges right of the right to secessione from Central Africa .
 Cuba releases the last 1,113 participants in the Bay of Pigs Invasion to the U.S. in exchange for food worth $53 million . Cuba released the last members of the invasion to the United States December 24 .
 December 30 United Nations troops occupy the last rebel positions in Katanga . Moise Tshombe moves to South Rhodesia . December 30 U.N. troops occupy last rebel position in Katanganga .
 An unexpected storm buries Maine under five feet of snow, forcing the Bangor Daily News to miss a publication date for the only time in history . The Maine Daily News missed its publication date only time it has been in the state in its history .
 American advertising man Martin K Speckter invents the interrobang, a new English-language punctuation mark . The same day, also the Netherlands are covered with several feet of snow .
 Familypedia wiki is available under the Creative Commons License . The content of this Familypedia Wiki is published under the same license as this Wiki .