 It was a lovely autumn day 40 years ago this month, when Americans realized that the oceans no longer protected us from enemy attack . September 11, 2001, was a day not unlike 9/11, 2001 .
 Those old enough to know the name John F Kennedy will never forget the fear that swept through homes and cities when the president appeared on television, grave and gray, to proclaim a crisis . October 22, 1962 .
 President Obama issued a stern ultimatum to the Russians that called them nuclear cheats and liars for placing offensive missiles in Cuba . He also left the impression that counteractions might any minute provoke a rain of Soviet missiles .
 The drama of the Cuban missile crisis has the power to instruct, beguile and entertain Americans in every decade . Hollywood has demonstrated time .
 The 2000 film version, with Kevin Costner playing an absurdly fictionalized role as Kennedy’s aide Kenneth O’Donnell, was called Thirteen Days . It refers to the period of public alarm plus the frantic, secret debate that preceded it as Kennedy planned a response to
 If the moviemakers had bothered with the Soviet and Cuban sides of the crisis, they could have made a vastly better film, Thirteen Weeks . The film is reasonably called Th13 Weeks .
 Had they examined the calamitous miscalculations on all sides, it might have been titled Thirteen Months . And had they examined them, they might have called it Thirteen months .
 Most accounts of the crisis concentrate only on the Washington players, led by the glamorous, nervous president and his shrewd younger brother, Robert. Robert.
 A view of Havana would feature the humbling of Fidel Castro, Cuba’s bearded Robin Hood, and his scheming younger brother, Raúl. Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro would be the bearded, bearded and bearded figure of Robin Hood .
 Khrushchev was drowning in sweat as his boldest Cold War maneuver collapsed into retreat . In Moscow a bombastic Nikita Khrushchevitch was drowned in sweat . Khrushchchev's boldest move collapsed in retreat as he retreated .
 Like the attacks of 9/11, the missile crisis had deep political roots that were unwittingly nourished by our own conduct . The missile crisis took place in the 1980s and '90s, when the U.S. was in control of North Korea .
 Our failure to imagine the threat beforehand caused us to ignore the few available warnings . Also like 9/11, our failure to anticipate the threat was similar to the failure to see it before .
 The 1962 showdown left us ill prepared for Osama bin Laden, because our Soviet foes 40 years ago were rational rivals who valued life . Yet we demonized them as evil aggressors, they were rational opponents who valued lives .
 We played nuclear poker against them but shared a common interest in the casino’s survival . The casino's survival is a key to its survival .
 We also have had credible reports on the contents of Soviet files and, most recently, verbatim records of crisis deliberations in the Kennedy White House. We have also had credible .
 Nikita Khrushchev provoked America not from a position of strength, as Kennedy feared, but from a chronic sense of weakness and frustration . It is clear now that Nikita was provoked by a chronic lack of strength and frustration, says Kennedy .
 It is clear from the historical record that the two superpowers were never as close to nuclear war as they urgently insisted in public . And it is also clear that the superpowers never really came close to a nuclear war .
 Khrushchev expected great returns from his radical reforms, release of political prisoners and engagement with the rest of the world .
 He had visited the U.S. preaching coexistence and vowing to compete peacefully . He had also visited the United States preaching peace .
 The Soviet hold on Eastern Europe, a vital zone of defense against hated Germany, remained tenuous . Khrushchev’s generals were clamoring for more expensive weaponry; his people were rioting to protest food shortages . China’�s Chairman Mao was openly condemning Khrush
 Khrushchev acquired the habit of rattling thegim at his most stubborn problems . After the launch of Sputnik in 1957 revealed the sophistication of Soviet rockets, Khruschev acquired a habit .
 The missiles cost far less than conventional forces, and were hoped to shift money from military budgets into the USSR's backward food and consumer industries .
 By aiming medium-range missiles at West Germany, France and Britain, he hoped to force NATO to acknowledge Soviet domination over Eastern Europe . By aiming at West German, France, Britain, and Germany, he wanted NATO to admit Soviet domination .
 President of Germany threatened to declare Germany permanently divided . He also threatened to expel Western garrisons from Berlin, which lay vulnerable in East Germany .
 Khrushchev expected the U.S. to be dealt with as an equal superpower . By also rattling longrange missiles at the United States, he hoped it would deal with it as a superpower .
 Eisenhower had not directly challenged the Soviets’ sway over Eastern Europe . He had not yielded to any of Khrushchev’s other ambitions .
 A new and inexperienced President Kennedy struck the Soviet leader as a brighter prospect for intimidation . A new President Kennedy was therefore struck as a bright prospect for Soviet leader .
 Kennedy was alarmed by Khrushchev's promise to support ‘wars of national liberation’ in Asia, Africa and Latin America . Kennedy had arrived at the White House in early 1961 visibly alarmed by the promise .
 Kennedy stumbled into the fiasco of Cuba’s Bay of Pigs, the humiliating failure of a CIA-sponsored invasion aimed at overthrowing Fidel Castro . Then, in April of that year, he stumbled into a humiliating failure .
 Khrushchev pummeled Kennedy with threats to end Western occupation rights in Berlin . He then watched with satisfaction when the president acquiesced in the building of the Berlin Wall .
 Kennedy's response to Khrushchev’s taunts was to flex his own missile muscle . Kennedy responded to the taunts with a series of missile launches .
 During his presidential campaign he had criticized Republicans for tolerating a ‘missile gap’ in Khrushchev’s favor . During his campaign he criticized Republicans .
 As both governments knew, the Russians held only 20 or 30 intercontinental missiles, of unreliable design, and were having trouble building more . The Russians had trouble making more than 30 of the missiles .
 The United States’ missile, bomber and submarine forces could strike 15 times as many Soviet targets . By contrast, the U.S. could strike more than 15 times more Soviet targets than any other nation .
 The Kennedy team boasted that it might resort to a “first use” of nuclear weapons, leaving Russia unable to strike U.S. targets . Kennedy team began to boast of this advantage .
 Soviet leader would give Americans a taste of real vulnerability, save money for other things and strengthen his negotiating position . Without having to wait a decade for long-range missiles that he could ill afford, the Soviet leader could well afford .
 Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the Soviet defense minister, embraced the idea . He helped sell it to dubious Soviet colleagues . Marshal Malinovski helped sell the idea to dubious colleagues .
 Khrushchev’s old chum and American expert Anastas Mikoyan predicted an unpleasant reaction from Washington and a tough sell in Cuba .
 Khrushchev thought he could hide the buildup from Kennedy until the missiles were mounted and armed . He hoped to reveal his new poker hand in November during visits to the U.N. and Havana .
 Castro brothers were desperate for Soviet weaponry to protect them from U.S. invasion . Castro brothers didn't want sealed-off bases under alien control .
 Khrushchev forgave Cuba’s debts, promised more economic aid and insisted his missiles would help defend the island . Castro's dream of inspiring other Latin revolutions was to be inspired by other Latin countries .
 Soviet ground troops in Cuba could serve as a trip wire to bring Moscow into any conflict, or Cuba could be included in defense agreements . There were easier ways to deter an invasion, including ground troops .
 Castro knew he was being used, but agreed to the bases to show ‘solidarity’ with the Communist bloc . Castro agreed to bases to win more aid for his people . Castro was using the bases as a way to win aid for the people .
 In Washington as in Moscow, domestic politics fueled the drive toward confrontation . Domestic politics also fueled the push toward confrontation, officials say .
 Through the summer of 1962, the U.S. Navy had tracked a large flotilla of ships from Soviet ports to Cuba . The CIA heard confusing reports about sightings of military equipment on the island .
 Republicans mocked Kennedy for his tolerance for a Soviet buildup just 90 miles from Florida . Republicans saw a chance to repay him for his past attacks on their Cuba policy .
 Intelligence teams detected only non-nuclear ‘defensive’ weapons . MIG fighter planes, torpedo boats and surface-to-air missiles had range of 25 miles .
 Having roundly misread each other, Khrushchev and Kennedy brought this diplomatic stew to a boil . Kennedy and Nixon misjudged each other in their first meeting .
 Khrushchev sent his ambassador, Anatoly Dobrynin, to Robert Kennedy with assurances that the Soviets would do nothing provocative before the U.S. election . The Soviets would not do anything provocative in advance of the election .
 RFK complained that the buildup in Cuba was bad enough . The ambassador insisted that his government would never give another nation control of offensive weapons .
 If Cuba ever became an offensive military base of significant capacity for the Soviet Union, Kennedy would do "whatever must be done" to protect U.S. security . Kennedy countered .
 American analysts concluded that the president’s strong warnings made it highly unlikely that the Soviets would install a missile base in Cuba . U.S. analysts concluded in the 1980s that it was highly unlikely the Soviet missile base would be installed .
 After all, they had never placed nuclear weapons outside their own territory, not even in Communist Europe . After all the nuclear weapons had never been placed outside their territory .
 Kennedy dismissed reports from spies in Cuba of missiles much larger than "defensive" antiaircraft SAMs . That fixed American mind-set caused Kennedy to dismiss reports of missiles .
 The Chinese shot down a U-2 plane photographing their terrain in Cuba on September 9 . The White House ordered pilots over Cuba to steer clear of areas protected by SAM defenses .
 CIA chief John McCone was the only Washington official to have reasoned his way into Khrushchev’s mind . The marriage of the CIA chief and former businessman McCone is ill timed .
 McCone’s absence meant his suspicions, and insights, were not heard in Washington for most of September . McCone: “I’m not sure what happened, but I’ve got a lot of my suspicions,” he said .
 An intelligence analyst spotted suspicious bulldozer patterns in the terrain in western Cuba . The patterns resembled the layout of missile bases in Russia, McCone says .
 U-2 cameras 13 miles up snapped remarkably clear pictures of medium-range missile transporters, erectors and launchpads . McCone insisted on more aggressive reconnaissance .
 U.S. nuclear weapons capable of striking Washington, D.C., St. Louis and St. Charles are at risk of being hit by nuclear missiles .
 Khrushchev was installing at least 24 medium-range ballistic missile launchers, plus 16 intermediaterange missiles that could reach any point in the continental United States except northwest corner .
 Kennedy was deeply committed to prohibiting bases in the military . Kennedy was also committed to banning bases in military history .
 The U-2 photographs were taken by the U.S. Air Force in the early hours of October 16 . President Obama first envisioned an air strike to destroy missiles before they became operational .
 His more sober second thought was to keep the news a tight secret until he could take counsel and sift his options . He decided to keep it a secret .
 What appears to have been a quickly devised and effective American plan of action was actually the product of chaotic, contentious debate among official and unofficial advisers . The President’s Men Convene .
 ExComm was a rump “executive committee of the National Security Council,” soon jargonized as “ExComm” and often met without Kennedy, to free up the discussion . They functioned as an “exComm’s” to free
 The ranking ExCommers were the president and his brother, the attorney general; Dean Rusk, secretary of state; Robert McNamara; McGeorge Bundy, national security adviser; Douglas Dillon and Douglas Dillon . They were also the secretary of defense and national security advisers .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff, CIA, CIA and U.N. representatives present . Adlai Stevenson: "The U.S. is a nation of strength"
 They all made a show of keeping their public schedules while moving in and out of secret meetings . They made a public show of secrecy during their meetings .
 From Tuesday, October 16, through Sunday, the 21st, they gulped sandwiches for lunch and dinner . They kept their own notes in longhand, without secretaries .
 They shuttled among meeting sites by crowding-style into a few cars to avoid a telltale herd of limousines .
 For the climactic hours of decision, the president cut short a campaign visit to Chicago, feigning a bad cold and a slight fever . The president also feigned a cold and said he had a fever .
 The president was afraid that his options could be dangerously reduced if Khrushchev knew he had been found out . The president feared that his . options could . be dangerously . reduced if he knew he was found out, he said .
 Kennedy worried that the Soviet leader might then stake out a preemptive threat to retaliate for any attack on his missiles, either by firing some of them or attacking American forces in Berlin or Turkey .
 Alerting Congress could have provoked demands for swift military action without allowing time to study the consequences . Alerting the U.S. military could have led to a rush to take action without time to assess the risks .
 The more the ExComm members talked, the less they agreed on a course of action . The more they talk, the more they agree on a way of action, they say .
 Some of the missiles, ExComm members speculated, would surely be armed with nuclear warheads within days, and all within weeks . All within weeks, the ExComm said .
 He had once said a missile was a missile, whether fired from 5,000 to 5 miles away . He had said a launch would be a missile whether fired at a distance of 5 or 5 miles .
 Defense Secretary McNamara held throughout the discussion that 40 or 50 more missiles pointed at U.S. targets, while perhaps quadrupling the Soviets’ strike capacity, did nothing to alter our huge strategic advantage .
 The Joint Chiefs disagreed, insisting that by dramatically increasing America’s sense of vulnerability, the Soviet weapons would greatly limit our choices in any future exchange of threats or fire . They disagreed .
 Everyone soon acknowledged that Soviet bases in Cuba were, at the very least, psychologically and politically intolerable . The Soviet bases were, for example, in Cuba, where they were .
 They would embolden Khrushchev’s diplomacy, especially when it came to his designs in Berlin, he says . The Soviets' designs in the 1950s and '60s would have emboldened the Soviet Union .
 They would also enhance Castro’s prestige in Latin America . They would erode Kennedy's stature at home and abroad . They also would also erode Castro's prestige in the region .
 Khrushchev’s deception was seen as undermining U.S.-Soviet negotiations . As if the missiles themselves were not challenge enough, it was also seen as a challenge .
 Bargaining might mean painful concessions in Berlin or withdrawal of U.S. missiles from NATO bases in Turkey . The weapons were technically obsolete, but they represented commitment to an ally .
 Bombing Cuba would surely kill Russians and risk Soviet counterattack against U.S. bases in Florida or Europe . Bombing would kill Russians, risk counterattack on American bases in Europe or Florida .
 A strike at Cuba was bound to miss some missiles and require a follow-up invasion to seize the island . In any case, a strike was bound for some missiles, and would require a second invasion of Cuba .
 Small wonder the advisers changed opinions as often as they changed clothes. Small wonder they changed opinions often .
 If we withdraw our missiles from Turkey, then the Turks would shout to the world that American guarantees are worthless, says President Obama . If we withdrew our missiles, then we would be seen as worthless, he says .
 If we sent a Polaris missile submarine into Turkish waters to replace the missiles, the Turks would say we always slither out of harm’s way . The Turks would be pleased with the move, if we put a Polaris submarine in Turkish waters, they say .
 He’ll suffer a surprise attack, seize the moral high ground and announce that the U.S. would rather risk world war than live with the vulnerability that all Europeans have long endured . Then he'll announce that he’s willing to risk a world war rather than live
 Well, it would not remove missiles already in place or prevent deliveries by air . It would not stop missiles already being delivered by air or remove them from place .
 Many Soviet missiles were installed, and the scent of crisis was in the air . Many Soviet missile launchers were installed in the Soviet Union . The scent of the smell of the air was also on the air at the time .
 We clamored for enlightenment, and officials mumbled about trouble in Berlin . We clamor for information, but officials said there was trouble in the city .
 Kennedy heard us approaching and asked our bureau chief, James "Scotty" Reston, to call him before we printed anything . Kennedy heard our approach and asked us to get to him, Reston said .
 Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko paid a scheduled visit to the White House . Thursday, October 18, was the day for a double bluff when Soviet foreign minister Andrei .
 He sparred with the president over Berlin but held tightly to his written-out claim that only ‘defensive” weapons were going to Cuba . He said only "defensive" weapons were being sent to Cuba.
 McNamara: Firm action was essential to preserve the president’s credibility, to hold the alliance together, to tame Khrushchev for future diplomacy . But as McNamara put it to the group, McNamara said, firm action was needed to protect the administration .
 ExComm had the benefit of the considered views of Llewellyn “Tommy” Thompson, Jr., the just returned ambassador to Moscow . Thompson knew Khrushchev better and longer than any Western diplomat . ExComm: ExComm was given the chance to learn from Thompson
 He thought the Soviet leader intended for his missiles to be discovered to invigorate his campaign against the West . He thought he intended for the discovery of his missiles .
 Thompson felt that Khrushchev might well respect a U.S. weapons blockade and was unlikely to risk a fight in faraway Cuba . Thompson felt the blockade might well well respect the United States weapons blockade .
 While he might strike impetuously at Berlin, that was a gamble he had been reluctant to take for four years . He was reluctant to move to Berlin for the first time in his career .
 Kennedy seemed to buy Thompson’s assessment . Kennedy returned Saturday from Chicago with his “cold,” Thompson said . Thompson: Kennedy has a cold .
 They could always ratchet up tougher action if Khrushchev didn’t back down . The government could always back down on the issue .
 Kennedy was haunted, however, by the Bay of Pigs and by his reputation for timidity . Kennedy was plainly haunted by the tragedy of the Bay .
 He ended the week’s deliberation by again cross-examining the Joint Chiefs . The Joint Chiefs are the subject of the latest round of hearings on the issue .
 The president decided to avoid violent measures for as long as possible . President Barack Obama decided not to take action against ISIS in Syria .
 He did not want to reveal the tactical reasons for preferring a blockade . But he did not reveal the reasons for wanting a blockade of Syria .
 Robert Kennedy piously planted in histories of the crisis . He insisted his aides use “the Pearl Harbor explanation” for rejecting an air strike . The rationale was disingenuous .
 Berlin's west German ambassador was fast asleep before midnight Friday . He was certain the agitation in Washington did not concern Berlin, and so my Times colleagues and I focused on Cuba .
 If it was Cuba, given all the recent alarms, that had to mean the discovery of “offensive” missiles . And if it were Cuba, it had to be Cuba, they had to find "offensive" missiles .
 On Sunday, October 21, as promised, Scotty Reston called the White House . Reston: "Scotty" Reston will be able to speak to President Barack Obama in Washington, DC .
 When Kennedy came on the line, Scotty asked me to listen on an extension . Scotty said, "Scotty asked for an extension. It's a good thing that Scotty listened to Kennedy."
 If he lost the element of surprise, Khrushchev could take steps that would deepen the crisis, he said . If he didn't win, he went on, he would take steps to further escalate the crisis .
 I at first resisted granting the president’s request. For reasons patriotic or selfish, I at least resisted granting it, he says . The president's request was granted .
 Given the president’s word of honor, I believe to this day that we were right to defer publication by 24 hours . The president's words of honor were so strong that the story was delayed for 24 hours, he says .
 Like the Washington Post, we held back most of what we knew about the White House .
 Kennedy’s speech that Monday evening, October 22, was the most menacing of any presidential address during the entire Cold War . Kennedy's speech was the first to mention the threat posed by the U.S. during the Cold War.
 Americans did not underrate the gravity of the events in Haiti . Families drew close, planned emergency escapes, hoarded food, and hung on every news bulletin .
 Friendly governments supported the president, but many of their people feared his belligerence, and some marched in protest . Some of the world's most friendly governments supported him .
 In a private letter to Khrushchev, Kennedy vowed to stand firm in Berlin, warning him not to misjudge the ‘minimum’ action the president had taken so far . Kennedy vowed not to give up on the “minimum” action he had taken in Berlin
 The Kremlin’s response encouraged both ExComm and diplomatic observers . ExComm: The Kremlin's response to the crisis is encouraging . The Kremlin has been criticized for its handling of the crisis in Ukraine .
 The Kremlin had no ready plan for counteraction . While denouncing America’s ‘piracy’ at sea and instructing Soviet agents abroad to fan the fear of war, the Kremlin obviously had no plan for countering .
 Moscow's government-controlled press pretended that Kennedy had challenged little Cuba rather than the Soviet Union . Moscow’s government- controlled press pretended .
 Khrushchev assented at once when the U.N. Secretary General, U. Thant, tried to broker a pause for negotiation, but Kennedy decided to balk . U.S. Secretary of State U.K. tried to broach a pause in negotiations . Khrush
 Washington prepared a blunt notice about how the U.S. planned to challenge Soviet ships and fire dummy depth charges to force submarines to surface .
 The president kept some of his nuclear bombers airborne for the Russians to notice . The Russians noticed the president kept them airborne .
 Khrushchev ordered his most vulnerable Cuba-bound ships to stop or turn tail . The ships were ordered to turn tail or turn away from the Soviet Union .
 The Soviets instructed the Cubans not to fire antiaircraft guns except in self-defense, giving American reconnaissance unhindered access . Washington also learned that the Soviets had instructed the Cuban government not to use the guns in defense .
 He also wanted the Pentagon generals eager to enforce the blockade to know that although it was a military action, it was intended only to communicate a political message .
 Work on the missile sites continued Thursday . Public tension continued Thursday because work on the sites continued .
 Kennedy let a Soviet oil tanker pass through the blockade after it identified itself and its cargo . Kennedy let it pass through a blockade after identifying itself and cargo .
 Soviet ship allowed Americans to inspect what they knew would be innocent cargo . Friday morning, October 26, was October 26 . Americans were allowed to inspect the cargo .
 At the prospect of negotiation, Kennedy still could not decide what price he was willing to pay for a Soviet withdrawal of the missiles .
 ExComm debated removing U.S. missiles in Turkey, but the Turks would not cooperate . Turkey would not have the United States removed missiles .
 The most unsettling hours were the next 24, which brought a maddening mix of good and bad news that rattled nerves in both Washington and Moscow . The next 24 brings a mix of bad and good news .
 Three unofficial sources reported a Soviet inclination to withdraw from Cuba if the U.S. promised publicly to prevent another invasion of the island . Three separate unofficial sources said the Soviet inclination was to withdraw if the United States .
 Moscow broadcast a colder message asking as well for an American withdrawal from Turkey . Moscow also asked for withdrawal of the U.S. from the region .
 Turks publicly protested and urged U.S. officials not to capitulate . The Turks have publicly protested against the move .
 The Russians seemed to be upping the ante, and Kennedy feared that he would lose world support and sympathy if he held out against the proposal to trade off reciprocal missile bases . Kennedy feared to lose support if he didn't accept the proposal .
 Another U-2 was chased out of Soviet Siberia, where it had accidentally strayed . Then came the news that an American pilot had been shot down over Cuba and killed, presumably by a Soviet SAM .
 The president expressed his greatest fear that diplomacy might not resolve the crisis after all . In another Kennedy-Reston conversation that night that night, he expressed his fear of diplomacy not resolving the crisis .
 He said reconnaissance simply had to continue, and if his planes were again molested, he might be forced to attack antiaircraft installations . He said the reconnaissance simply must continue .
 The Pentagon is pressing for just such an attack, the president made doubly sure that no one assumed he had already decided to strike .
 He envisioned a slowest possible escalation of pressure on the Soviets, starting with a blockade of oil shipments to Cuba, then of other vital supplies . The U.S. hoped to avoid a nuclear conflagration that the American public feared .
 If he had to shoot, he thought it was wiser to sink a ship than to attack the missile sites, he said . And if he had a chance, he decided to sink the ship than attack missile sites .
 Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev was anywhere near risking anything like a nuclear shoot-out . Plainly neither Kennedy nor . Khrush .chev was nowhere near risking nothing like a . nuclear shoot out .
 Kennedy yielded to advice from several ExComm members that he accept Khrushchev’s no-invasion bargain and ignore the bid for a missile swap in Turkey . Still, without much hope for negotiations, Kennedy opted to ignore the deal .
 The president signaled his readiness to guarantee that the U.S. would not attack Cuba if the missiles were withdrawn . But simultaneously sent his brother to tell the Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that work on the missiles had to stop at once .
 Only a half dozen Americans knew of the promise, and they, as well as the Russians, kept the secret for more than a decade . Only a few Americans knew about the promise of the deal .
 The sun shone bright in Washington Sunday morning, October 28, as Radio Moscow read out Khrushchev's response to Kennedy’s offer . A collective Sigh of Relief .
 Castro refused to admit United Nations inspectors sent to the island to verify the de-armament . Castro bypassed in all the negotiations, refusing to admit U.N. inspectors . The inspectors had to uncover missile cargoes for aerial inspection .
 For a month, Castro refused to let the Russians pack up their “gift” to him of several old Ilyushin bombers . Kennedy also wanted to remove several old Soviet-era bombers, which he also wanted removed .
 President Kennedy, sensing Khrushchev’s discomfort in retreat, immediately warned his jubilant aides against gloating . President Kennedy warned aides not to gloat about the victory .
 He had now earned his spurs as a Cold Warrior and the political freedom to reach other deals with the Soviets, starting with a crisis “hot line” A ban on aboveground nuclear tests and a live-and-let-live calm in Berlin .
 Fidel Castro was killed by a psychotic admirer of Fidel Castro . Thirteen months later he would be killed in Dallas, Texas .
 Khrushchev emerged from the crisis with grudging respect for Kennedy . He tried to share in the credit for moving toward a better relationship with the president .
 His generals and fellow oligarchs vowed never again to suffer such humiliation . But his generals and . oligarchs vow never again . Heavily wealthy oligarchs have vowed never to suffer similar humiliation again .
 Two years later, denouncing Khrushchev’s many “harebrained schemes,” they overthrew him . They went on to spend themselves poor to achieve strategic weapons parity with the United States .
 The Soviet Union and the United States never again stumbled into a comparable confrontation . The Soviets and the U.S. never again faced each other again .
 Both nations acquired many more nuclear weapons than they would ever need, but they kept close touch . They learned to watch each other from orbiting satellites, to guard against surprise and miscalculation .
 The arms race burdened both superpowers and contributed to the eventual implosion of the Soviet empire . Arms race helped contribute to the collapse of Soviet Empire .
 Other nations reached for the diplomatic prowess that nuclear weapons seemed to confer . The U.S. reached for diplomatic prowess .
 ExCommers wrongly assumed that they could again use escalating military pressure to pursue a negotiated deal in Vietnam . They wrongly assumed they could use escalated military pressure, they said .
 They failed because none of them could read Ho Chi Minh the way Tommy Thompson had read Khrushchev . They failed to do so because they failed to read the Vietnamese leader's words .
 This past acquired a rational, ordered form in our memories that ill prepared us for new and incoherent dangers . This past, however, acquired an order form in its memories, but it ill prepared them for new . dangers, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 In our moments of greatest vulnerability, it was our inability to imagine the future that condemned us to suffer the shock of it . In the past 40 years ago and again last year, the U.S. was at its lowest ebbies .