 Kennedy and America as the winners in the eyes of most independent spectators . One of the consequences of this was that both sides wished to get that close again, and it left Kennedy as the winner in the world .
 The Soviets had missile based on a friendly country that were in striking range of nearly all American cities . America felt vulnerable with The Soviets having missile based . on a friend country that was in striking . range .
 It appeared to the world that Khrushchev had backed down and had conceded all the key points to Kennedy . The world had appeared to believe Khrushchevitch was backing down .
 Kennedy’s ability to keep the agreement that would remover her missiles in Turkey was a victory . Another example of American victory was the agreement to remove her missiles from Turkey . The agreement was also a victory for Kennedy .
 As a result it appeared to the world that Kennedy had conceded nothing . Kennedy had appeared to have conceded nothing. It appeared to be a result of the decision .
 In the absence of any actual fighting between America and the Soviet Union, the ability to win prestige was doubly important .
 Although Kennedy superficially came out of the crisis better, America did loose in some respects . America's relationship with the Kennedy administration has been strained in recent years .
 The policy of containment had been shown not to be working, thus proved a failure when the thousand paratroopers where massacred by the guerrilla army at the Bay of Pigs .
 Cuba was communist country, fully in support of Russia close to America . Cuba is now a close ally of the U.S.
 This limited American influence in Europe, and although not public, left Kennedy and America unable to act as freely as she had with an immediate nuclear threat . This limited U.S. influence in European politics, it left Kennedy unable to speak freely .
 The impression that many in and outside Russia gained that Khrushchev was a weak leader contributed to his downfall two years later . Many in and out of Russia gained the impression that he was weak leader .