 This article explores and evaluates the activities of the CIA in the crisis . This article includes the CIA's activities in the wake of the crisis in Syria .
 It examines how intelligence-gathering and analysis was conducted and how assessments and information were provided to decision-makers . The report is based on a study of intelligence gathering and analysis .
 The significance of CIA covert action against Cuba prior to October 1962, for example, is explored . In this article, we explore the significance of the CIA's covert action in Cuba .
 The U.S. intelligence community mistakenly thought the Soviets were not going to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . Another important focus is the mistaken assessment of the United States intelligence community that the Soviets weren't going to use nuclear missiles .
 The nature and significance of this conclusion is considered, along with the views of the Director of Central Intelligence, John McCone, who believed Khrushchev would deploy nuclear missiles .
 The view that the CIA played a successful part in monitoring the Soviet military build-up after the discovery of mediumrange ballistic missiles is analysed .
 The lack of success in identifying Soviet tactical nuclear weapons is also considered . The Soviet Union has not been able to identify any of the weapons .
 Research into the crisis extends to Soviet and other decision-makers . The research helps facilitate a more genuinely international intelligence history of the Cold War .
 The article proffers a reflective and nuanced assessment that underlines the achievements as well as the shortcomings of the CIA at this most crucial moment in the Cold War .
 Intelligence community operated extensively and well in connection with Cuba . Intelligence community's inquiry into its actions during the Cuban missile crisis revealed shortcomings .
 Every major weapons system introduced into Cuba by the Soviets was detected, identified, and reported before any of these systems attained an operational capability . All major weapons systems were detected before they were operational .
 I am grateful to Chikara Hashimoto for comments on an earlier draft of this article . I am also grateful for the comments made by Hashimoto .
 Understanding intelligence in the crisis is pivotal to understanding key decisions . Understanding intelligence is crucial to understanding what is happening in the world's largest crisis .
 The focus of this article is the Central Intelligence Agency – the most significant intelligence organization in the crisis . The CIA is the most powerful intelligence agency in the world .
 The aim is to explore the role and significance of the CIA in the U.S. handling of the crisis . The aim of the project is to look at the CIA's role in the American response .
 Many writers on intelligence see secret intervention in the affairs of other states as an intrinsic part of intelligence . I Many writers see secret interventions in other countries as an integral part of the intelligence .
 In the United States this reflects the practices of the CIA, where covert action has been a prominent mission since the agency’s creation . In the U.S. this reflects a prominent role in covert action .
 By the early 1960s, covert action was embedded in U.S. statecraft . There was little evidence of moral qualms about such practices in Washington, says historian .
 As a valued instrument of foreign policy it was seen to play a decisive role in regime change in Iran and Guatemala . Despite the fiasco of the Bay of Pigs, no attempt was made to revisit assumptions about how the Cold War should be waged .
 The scale and scope of these operations are extraordinary in hindsight, says CNN's John Defterios . The scale of the operations is extraordinary, he says, in hindsight .
 Operation Mongoose, launched in November 1961, involved an annual budget of $50 million . The operation was the first of its kind in the United States .
 Activities ranged across poisoning sugar exports, destroying oil refineries, blowing up railway bridges, and sabotaging chemical plants . Activities were carried out across the globe .
 Covert action was part of a broader and coordinated approach to weakening and intimidating Cuba, which included diplomatic isolation, economic sanctions and military threats . The U.S. has been involved in a covert effort to weaken and intimidate Cuba .
 Cuba was suspended from the Organization of American States in January 1962 . Cuba was banned from the OAS in January 1963 . The Cuban government was suspended in 1962 .
 A series of military exercises were conducted, including those designed to rehearse U.S. contingency plans for an invasion . The exercises are designed to prepare the United States for a possible invasion .
 In October 1962, a Marine Corps amphibious assault exercise was planned for the island of Vieques near Puerto Rico . The exercise was scheduled for October 31, 1962 .
 The covert side of covert action was preserved through plausible deniability . The CIA's covert operations were preserved through 'possible deniability'
 For Havana, American plausible deniability added hypocrisy as well as insult to injury . Havana says the U.S. was complicit in the Cuban government's actions . The U.N. State Department says it is investigating the situation .
 The CIA tried to kill Fidel Castro in Cuba . The CIA was involved in the assassination of the Castro family .
 The most controversial aspect of the controversial aspect was the outsourcing of the endeavour to the American mafia . And the most controversial part of the project was its outsourcing .
 The Sabotage of the United Nations in the Cuban Conflict and the Missile Crisis of 1962 , 73.7 . The U.N. role was key to the Cuban conflict and the Cuban Missile Crisis .
 The Church Committee ‘found concrete evidence’ of at least eight plots to assassinate Castro involving the CIA from 1960 to 1965 . The committee found concrete evidence of eight plots involving CIA .
 The Director of the CIA, John McCone testified to the Church Committee that he was not made aware of the assassination planning . The Director testified that he did not know about the assassination plans .
 Various authors have pointed to an assassination track in Operation Zapata that could have rendered the Bay of Pigs operation more credible in hindsight . The assassination track could have been used to make the operation credible .
 Whether the President was aware of, or more importantly sanctioned, CIA assassination planning hinges on how far the CIA was acting as ‘a rogue elephant’ The balance of probabilities strongly suggests that it was not .
 The more closely scrutinized CIA activities are examined, the greater the sense of ridicule they generate . CIA activities generate more of a sense of humor, the more closely examined .
 CIA operative describes how he used bags of inflammable material tied to the tails of cats to set fire to fields of sugar crops . CIA operative used bags tied to cats' tails to burn sugar fields .
 The Church Committee solemnly recorded the plans of agency toxicologists to use thallium to cause Fidel Castro’s beard to fall out .
 When the CIA’s nefarious activities are interwoven with salacious tales of mistresses and lovers, the story resembles a spoof of a James Bond film .
 The more important consideration was that covert action did not succeed, the agency says . From the perspective of the agency and its political masters, it's important to keep quiet, he says .
 Crucial questions remain about the unintended consequences of the CIA’s operations, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com . Sutter writes that the CIA is responsible for the deaths of Osama bin Laden.
 Khrushchev's thinking gained ground in the 1980s and 1990s as western academics gained access to former Soviet officials . The suggestion that the defence of Cuba was paramount in the thinking became more mainstream .
 Whether the CIA’s covert actions provided context or pretext for Operation Anadyr is therefore part of a broader debate about Khrushchev's motives . The CIA's covert actions are part of an ongoing debate about the motives behind Operation Anadyr .
 Opinions differ over the primary motive for Khrushchev’s actions, but some say it was to protect his family .
 William Taubman suggests that Khrushchev saw the deployment as ‘a cure-all’ for a range of problems . WilliamTaubman: 'Krushchev thought it would be a 'cure-all' for a host of problems'
 Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali invoke Agatha Christie’s Murder on the Orient Express, wherein a dozen suspects are all guilty of murder . Aleksander Fursko and Timothy Naftali invoke the murder of 12 suspects in the case .
 A consensus developed after the crisis that emphasized Soviet inferiority in the strategic nuclear balance as the driver in Khrushchev’s action . Initially, among western historians, a consensus of opinion was that .
 In 2006, Fursenko and Naftali argued that Khrushchev’s action was precipitated by warnings from the Soviet General Staff that their InterContinental Ballistic Missile programme was in disarray and their existing missiles vulnerable to pre-emption .
 How far the U.S. threat to Cuba drove the Soviet missile deployment remains a matter of debate .
 Cuban fears of attack contributed to Cuban receptivity to Soviet missile bases . That it contributed to Cuba's willingness to accept the bases, but that's another matter .
 The CIA-organized invasion of the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 led the Cubans to believe the threat of invasion was very real . The crisis in October 1962 led the U.S. to invade Cuba in response to the threat .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba could also increase the risk of American attack, as well as exposing Cuba to the accusation that it was a Soviet satellite . Yet, Soviet missiles could also lead to an American attack on Cuba .
 Castro, on the other hand, declared in 1992 that his motive in accepting the missiles was to contribute to the international socialist cause . Castro declared that he accepted the missiles in 1992 . Castro said in 1992 in a statement that he would not accept missiles in Cuba .
 The build-up of Soviet forces in Cuba was monitored by the US intelligence community during the summer and autumn of 1962 .
 CIA identified V-75 Surface-to-Air Missiles, Ilyushin-28 medium-range bombers, MIG-21 fighters, and Sopka coastal-defence cruise missiles .
 Public concern focused on whether the Soviets were deploying ‘offensive’ nuclear-armed surface-to-surface ballistic missiles . President Kennedy issued public and private warnings to Moscow of potential consequences .
 As between these two, the establishment of a submarine base would be the more likely, it would be more likely .
 The development of a Soviet naval base, including facilities for nuclear missile-carrying submarines, was part of the original Soviet plan of deployment, but was dropped by Khrushchev in September .
 CIA analysts were convinced that Khrushchev would not deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba . CIA Director of Central Intelligence John McCone was convinced that he would .
 With the discovery of Soviet SAMs in August, McCone pressed his views on senior colleagues and on the President .
 McCone told Kennedy he believed the Soviets were deploying nuclear missiles in Cuba . He was away for a crucial month, from 23 August to 23 September . McCone went to the south of France for his honeymoon .
 The DCI did spend some of his honeymoon communicating with the agency . He was absent when the Special National Intelligence Estimate was issued .
 There had been no direct U-2 overflights of Cuba since 5 September . More significantly, he was unaware until he returned that there were no direct overflights .
 SNIE 85-3-62 was completed by the Board of National Estimates . None of the Board members agreed with the DCI .
 The discovery of the Medium-Range Ballistic Missiles vindicated McCone . McCone says the discovery vindicated the discovery .
 "In a way our misestimate of Soviet intentions got an ex post facto validation," says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 SAM deployments did help alert officials to identify possible Soviet missile bases . SAMs were not a warning indicator of MRBM deployment, though .
 McCone’s linkage between the SAMs and the MRBMs may have been mistaken . The SAMs may not have been linked to each other .
 If I were Khrushchev, I would put MRBMs in Cuba’, he told Maxwell Taylor and his colleagues . ‘I would be happy to see them in Cuba,’ he said .
 Khrushchev's reasoning about SAMs was incorrect, but the hunch behind his thinking reflected a clearer intuitive grasp of the importance of the SAMs to the strategic nuclear balance .
 The judgement of the CIA and the U.S. intelligence community was wrong . The judgement was wrong.
 Whether the mistaken estimate was of any great significance in the conduct of the U.S. government is a different question .
 Kennedy was able to plot his course of action, and to draw back from his initially bellicose reaction to their discovery on 16 October, when he was adamant that they would be removed by force .
 Thanks to studies of Soviet decision-making, we can now attempt to map assessments and actions of the U.S. government and the CIA against Soviet decisions and actions .
 In so doing, we can seek to create a genuinely international intelligence history of the crisis . We can try to create an international history of what happened .
 U.S. declassified documents show how intelligence was presented to U.K. decision-makers . American declassification also allows us to look at how intelligence presented to the United States .
 CIA hunted for Soviet nuclear warheads, but found none, though its advice to policymakers was based on the assumption that warheads had arrived . CIA found none of the warheads .
 The CIA failed to identify the nuclear warhead storage depot at Bejucal because the Soviets made no attempt to provide additional security . Michael Dobbs has shown, however, that the Soviets did not make any additional security arrangements .
 Eight nuclear warheads arrived at the MRBM site at Calabazar de Sagua on the afternoon of 27 October . Eight warheads were sent to the site on the same day .
 SNIE was seen as CIA’s failure, its subsequent performance was judged a success . The SNIE has been seen as a failure, but it was judged to be a success by the CIA .
 The U-2s were used to gather intelligence on Cuba . The most prominent were the high-altitude aerial reconnaissance operations of the U.2s .
 The Eisenhower administration’s idiosyncratic procurement practices had enabled the CIA rather than the Pentagon to develop and operate a military reconnaissance aircraft . Concern at the possible shooting down of CIA pilots led to the decision in October 1962 that Strategic Air Command planes would replace those of the CIA in the overfl
 Richard Bissell, CIA Deputy Director for Plans, organized the U-2 programme . Bissell was credited with the success of the U.2 programme in the 1960s and '90s .
 National Photographic Interpretation Center was vital to the timely exploitation of U-2 intelligence . Of equal importance was the development of the NPCP's expertise in analysing .
 NPIC Director Art Lundahl presented the photographic evidence to the President and his senior officials during the crisis .
 Human intelligence remained a core business for the CIA . The U-2 program was a departure from the CIA’s traditional roles .
 In Washington, various liaison services also provided information from their embassies in Havana . In Washington D.C., liaison services provided information, including from embassies in Cuba .
 Gauging the accuracy of intelligence from sources in Cuba was a formidable challenge . Gauging accuracy of the intelligence was a challenge for the CIA .
 Many of those who believed they spotted Soviet ballistic missiles had indeed seen ballistic missiles but not ‘offensive’ ones . Many believed they saw Soviet missiles had seen Soviet missiles .
 McCone concluded that of the 3,500 refugee and agent reports, ‘only eight in retrospect were considered as reasonably valid indicators of the deployment of offensive missiles to Cuba’ This remains an exemplar of the problem of signals and noise in analysis of warning intelligence identified by Roberta
 The first MRBM site was photographed on 14 October . Several reports were instrumental in targeting U-2 flights on the San Christόbal area .
 DIA analysts had earlier signed up to the conclusions of SNIE 85-3-62 . They became suspicious of the configuration of SAM deployments that correlated with human intelligence .
 At the beginning of October, he persuaded Defense Secretary McNamara that the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance should be asked to authorize direct U-2 overflights of the San Christosos area .
 Detecting missiles illustrated the importance of all-source analysis, not just aerial reconnaissance . Detecting the missiles was the first time the U.S. had seen a missile strike in the area .
 The significance of signals intelligence is much less clear, though it was conducted on an extensive scale . The significance is not clear, but it is believed to have been conducted on a large scale .
 Oleg Penkovsky was a colonel in Soviet Military Intelligence, run jointly by the British Secret Intelligence Service and the CIA . He was arrested on 22 October 1962, the day the crisis went public .
 He had previously provided western intelligence with technical information, including field manual for the R-12/ SS-4 .
 Richard Helms, then CIA Deputy Director of Plans, believed this information enabled American decision-makers to know exactly when the missiles would become operational . Helms’s view was crucial .
 Helms' argument that Penkovsky’s intelligence gave the President three extra days, between 16 and 19 October (by when CIA estimated two MRBM sites were operational), is central to the case that the intelligence was vital during the crisis . Helms argues that the CIA estimated
 This implies that Kennedy might have launched a military attack on Cuba had he not understood the state of readiness of the missiles . Kennedy might not have attacked Cuba if he had not known the missile readiness of Cuba's missiles .
 President's initial reaction on 16 October reflected anger at Khrushchev’s behaviour, though this quickly gave way to a more pragmatic disposition in the following days .
 Some senior officials believed that the operational status of the missiles would determine when a decision to destroy them had to be taken . The operational status would determine the decision, officials said .
 The Joint Chiefs argued in favour of air strikes the following day unless there was ‘irrefutable evidence’ that dismantling of the missiles had begun . Khrushchev had announced that the MRBMs would be withdrawn .
 Different views of Penkovsky’s intelligence in the crisis have also emerged . Very different views have emerged on the intelligence of the crisis .
 Everything we have learned of how Kennedy behaved during the crisis strongly suggests he would not have acted with such belligerence . Moreover, notwithstanding JFK’s angry rhetoric on 16 October, JFK would have not acted belligerently, the author says .
 V. McCone’s assertion to Kennedy after the crisis that every major Soviet weapons system was ‘detected, identified, and reported’ was mistaken .
 In 1992, it was also erroneously suggested that Soviet commanders in Cuba had pre-delegated authority to fire them .
 Historians believe that Washington was unaware of the Soviet tactical nuclear weapons . Most historians believe the U.S. did not know about the weapons .
 Coleman argues that the President not only knew of their capabilities but factored them into his calculations and was in consequence deterred from invasion . Coleman says the President knew of his capabilities and was deterred by his actions .
 McNamara expressed surprise at the 1992 revelations . McNamara, on the other hand, expressed surprise by the revelations .
 Details also emerged about eighty Meteor FKR-1 cruise missiles . Subsequently, details also emerged of eighty Meteor cruise missiles.
 United States analysts misidentified these as conventionally armed Sopka coastal-defence missiles . U.S. analysts mistakenly misidentified the missiles as conventional weapons .
 FKR-1s were deployed to their designated launch sites within range of the United States Naval base at Guantanamo Bay . More recently, Michael Dobbs has provided a graphic account of how F.K.1s are deployed .
 There were forty-two Ilyushin-28s, comprising thirty-three maritime and nine air force planes . In Cuba, the Soviets dispatched a squadron of nine jet bombers, capable of carrying nuclear bombs (six of which arrived)
 According to Brugioni, Ilyushin-28s were photographed en route to Cuba on 28 September . The United States intelligence community did not identify them until 9 October .
 May and Zelikow state that ‘These bombers, though capable of carrying nuclear weapons, were being phased out of the Soviet air force as obsolete.’
 It was only on 22 October when Kennedy publically insisted on withdrawal of the bombers that they became significant in Washington . The withdrawal of bombers complicated the negotiations to conclude the crisis in November .
 The bombers actually configured to carry nuclear ordnance remained in their crates at Holguin airfield . CIA and U.S. intelligence remained oblivious to their capability .
 The debate about how close we came to nuclear war has been informed by revelations from Soviet as well as American sources, in particular concerning tactical nuclear weapons . The debate is informed by Soviet and American sources .
 Greater understanding of Soviet operations has illuminated significant gaps in U.S. identification of Soviet conventional forces .
 The CIA underestimated the numbers of Soviet combat troops on Cuba . The CIA failed to realize the nature of the Soviet expeditionary force .
 Garthoff recounts how estimates of Soviet military personnel rose from 8,000–10,000 on 22 October to some 12,000-16,000 by 19 November . Garthoffs: Estimates of overall Soviet military . personnel rose as Soviet forces increased by some 15 to 12,
 The possibility of tactical nuclear deployments was not the subject of systematic estimative scrutiny . American military planners were exercised about possible Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in preparing the invasion .
 Much is still unknown about how the U.S. intelligence community reached assessments of the different types of Soviet nuclear deployments . Much remains unknown about the intelligence community's assessments .
 The significance of the intelligence (or lack of intelligence) about the tactical nuclear weapons is inextricably bound up with counterfactual questions about whether, or rather under what circumstances, Kennedy would have invaded Cuba .
 Garthoff argued in 1998 that unless intelligence was presumed to be capable of knowing everything about an adversary, on the basis of what had been declassified, the US 77 would not be able to know everything about a rival .
 If Washington believed there were a hundred or so tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba, this would have complicated an agreed settlement on the Soviet withdrawal . This would have stymied an agreed agreement on the withdrawal .
 It has now emerged that the Soviets and Cubans were engaged in fraught negotiations over the transfer of tactical nuclear missiles to the host country . It has also emerged that they were also engaged in negotiations .
 The suggestion that Cuba under Castro was on the verge of becoming a nuclear weapons state would almost certainly have scuppered the deal . Kennedy and Khrushchev had struck a deal that would have saved the deal that had been struck .
 We know of one area where the inability to understand the capabilities and intentions of the adversary may have come close to precipitating inadvertent nuclear war . The inability of understanding the capabilities of the adversaries may have precipitated inadvertent war .
 Khrushchev abandoned the plan to develop a naval base in Cuba but decided to persevere with the deployment of four diesel-electric submarines in Cuba in September . In September, the Soviet leader decided to abandon the plan .
 Each torpedo was equipped with a single nuclear torpedo with a yield comparable to the bomb dropped on Hiroshima . Each torpedo had a nuclear bomb with a maximum yield of more than 1,000 miles .
 The U.S. Navy sought to surface these boats by using ad hoc Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures devised within the Pentagon and communicated to the Soviet government on 23 October .
 The procedures were discussed in ExComm on 24 October, when, despite misgivivings, Kennedy accepted McNamara’s actions .
 Accounts suggest several captains believed they were under attack . Dramatic claims have been made that on one boat the captain was close to firing his nuclear torpedo .
 None of the discussions in the Executive Committee of the National Security Committee suggest that consideration was given to the possibility that submarines were carrying nuclear weapons that their commanders might consider using .
 The gap between the carefully calibrated threat of force in Washington and the operational reality at sea is striking . The gap is striking between Washington's carefully calibrated threats of force and operational reality in the Pacific .
 How we interpret the risks depends in part on how we interpret accounts of what occurred on the Soviet submarines . The risks depend on the accounts of the Soviet submarine operations .
 Whether U.S. actions represented failure of intelligence or a failure of policy is a matter for adjudication . Whether we determine that American actions represented a failure .
 Covert action against Castro’s Cuba clearly failed to achieve its aims . Assassination attempts against Castro ended in failure and, later, opprobrium and ridicule . Covert actions against Castro's Cuba were unsuccessful .
 Most historians believe that Khrushchev’s motives reflected various objectives . Many have long believed Soviet strategic inferiority (publically revealed by the Kennedy administration) was a central Soviet concern .
 The CIA's sabotage and subversion, along with other coordinated activities including contingency planning for an invasion, were, for Moscow and Havana, evidence of malign American intent . Yet defending Cuba was a factor, and the CIA’s subversion was also a factor .
 The CIA’s role restored confidence in the agency and its leadership within Washington after the Bay of Pigs debacle and failure to anticipate deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . The CIA helped rebuild confidence in Washington's trust in the CIA .
 In the summer and autumn of 1962 the CIA co-ordinated a comprehensive interagency intelligence collection and analysis programme aimed at discovering what kind of military weapons the USSR was sending to Castro . In other words, this was the agency’s founding principle of ‘central intelligence’
 McCone circumnavigated SNIE-85-3 . McCone's bullish representation of the intelligence community’s achievements to Kennedy circumbumbed .
 The revelations about Soviet tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba point to potentially serious failures . Moreover, the revelations point to potential serious failures in Cuba, says historian .
 SNIE-85-3 has a ‘failure of estimative empathy’ to the one Garthoff ascribes to . The lack of systematic analysis of possible tactical deployments suggests a further . ‘A lack of . systematic analysis suggests a . further ‘empathy
 If Kennedy had opted for invasion, the likelihood of nuclear weapons being used would have been higher . The likelihood of using nuclear weapons would be higher, says Brugioni .
 The actions of the U.S. Navy could have precipitated Soviet nuclear use . Furthermore, the actions were likely to precipitate use of nuclear weapons .
 How Khrushchev would react to military action or the blockade of Cuba was critical . How he reacted to the blockade was critical for the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 McNamara quoted from a SNIE on 20 October in support of his argument for the blockade . How much attention was paid to the SNIEs is unclear, though it is unclear .
 The impression is that when it came to Khrushchev’s reactions, the intelligence community was one voice among a number . The impression was that when . the intelligence . community was just one voice .
 In addition to his participation in ExComm, the DCI met regularly with the President during the crisis .
 He is generally labelled a hawk in Kennedy’s administration as he supported military action . He is considered a hawkish in Kennedy's administration .
 As crisis reached its denouce, he was drawn to some form of trade on the Jupiters in Turkey .
 Khrushchev called for removal of nuclear missiles from Turkey from Turkey . Kennedy consulted a group of his closest advisers on the issue .
 McCone was not present at the meeting on 27 October when a secret offer to Khrushchev was designed to withdraw the IRBMs from Turkey behind NATO’s back .
 Subsequent CIA analyses of how the crisis ended were not privy to this information . Subsequent analyses of the crisis were not able to reveal how it ended up .
 McCone’s willingness to speak truth unto power earned him plaudits . McCone: ‘I’m not afraid to speak out, but I’ve got the right to do so.’ McCone said. ‘’
 His awareness of the domestic political needs of the Kennedy administration was apparent . Yet he was aware of his political needs in the domestic matters .
 Barrett and Holland have demonstrated how he was ‘economical with the truth’ in explaining the suspension of direct overflights over Cuba in September/October, which he disingenuously attributed entirely to the weather . The suspension was due to the 'weather' in Cuba .
 Barrett and Holland infer from comments by the President to his brother that McCone received little gratitude for these actions . Barrett, Holland and Holland also infer from . comments by . comments that . President to McCone's brother that he received little . gratitude for his actions .
 For historians, the missile crisis illustrates that indisputable facts, knowns and unknowns can mutate with new sources and interpretations . Historians: "For historians, it's important to remember that the history of the crisis is still relevant today and relevant again"
 The CIA made errors, some emerged in recent years concerning tactical nuclear forces . It is clear that the CIA made mistakes, some of which emerged from recent years .
 The significance of the failure in September was limited, but the agency and the US intelligence community did succeed in subsequently detecting and monitoring the MRBMs . Khrushchev realized that they had been discovered before he realized they were discovered . The significance was limited .
 The Cuban missile crisis is a study in the value and limits of intelligence . It was a study of the value of intelligence in the eyes of the U.S.
 The Cold War was the moment in the Cold War when we came closest to nuclear war . We have learned of episodes that suggest the risks were greater than was recognized .