 By now, I think it is safe to say that everyone is kind of sick of discussing the 2016 election season . This year's election season is officially over .
 However nauseating it may have been, it proved to be unprecedented and monumental in various ways . It proved to have been unprecedented in many ways, and it was monumental in the process .
 The two major party candidates were the most disliked in modern political history . Unprecedented, for example, in the fact that the two major parties candidates were most unpopular in modern history .
 The Republican candidate, now President-elect, has run perhaps the most hate-filled, deplorable campaign in recent memory . He touts himself as a good businessman yet probably couldn't tell you the difference between Keynes and Marx .
 He often speaks of running the country like a business and harps on immigration as one of the major problems facing the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 In fact, he compulsively prevaricates and can&amp;rsquo;t seem to string two cohesive sentences together . In fact he can't string two coherent sentences together, he says .
 The former Democratic candidate, on the other hand, bears a resemblance to an Eisenhower Republican . Former Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton is a Republican, but not a Democrat .
 She is an intelligent and experienced politician full of contradictions, she says . She is also an intelligent, experienced politician, she adds . She says she is a woman with 'a lot of contradictions'
 She was certainly preferable to Trump on domestic issues,g., women&amp;rsquo;s rights, race, and overall economic policy . She was also preferable on global scientific matters like climate change .
 There are serious problems with Hillary Clinton&amp;rsquo;s record. Nevertheless, there are serious issues with her record, CNN.com says .
 Hillary Clinton is not the epitome of honesty or integrity either . While Trump compulsively exaggerates and prevaricates, Hillary Clinton does not have the same integrity .
 Up until 2013, she didn&amp;rsquo;t support same-sex marriage, yet got defensive and lied about the strength of her record on this issue . She didn't support gay marriage until 2013 .
 Despite the fact that FBI Director James Comey publicly stated that classified material was indeed sent over Clinton&amp;rsquo;s unsecure server, she continued to dance around that subject as if she still didn't know the public was privy to Comey's statements .
 I could expand on the former Secretary of State&amp;rsquo;s flip-flopping and dishonesty over the years when it comes to problems like email security, I said . I could . expand on . the former secretary of state&amp . of State .
 Five people in her employ took the Fifth Amendment rather than testify before Congress in open session on the subject . And the disturbing fact that five of her employees took the 5th Amendment is disturbing .
 In spite of media attention, failings such as these are far from being her main flaw, and are, in this author&amp;rsquo;s opinion, a distraction from much deeper issues . However, in spite of their receiving a great deal of media . attention, these
 As previously alluded to, Clinton&amp;rsquo;s foreign policy bears much more of a resemblance to the Eisenhower/Dulles brothers than it does to what one might expect from someone who describes herself as taking a back seat to no-one when it comes to progressive
 Allen Dulles and his brother John Foster Dulles orchestrated foreign policy under the Eisenhower administration . Mossadegh and Shah Pahlavi were assassinated by the Shah of Iran in the early 1960s .
 Sullivan and Cromwell was the preeminent law firm for Wall Street in the fifties . They were former partners at Sullivan & Cromwell, which was the top law firm .
 Allen and Foster married global corporate interests and covert military action into a well-oiled machine that promoted coups, assassinations and the blood-soaked destruction of democracies around the world . The pair married corporate interests with covert military actions .
 Iran's democratically elected leader Mohammed Mossadegh vowed to nationalize his country&amp;rsquo;s oil and petroleum resources . The Dulles brothers designed a phony indigenous overthrow that installed Reza Shah Pahlavi into power in 1953 .
 His brutal and repressive reign lasted until 1979, and his downfall provoked a fundamentalist Islamic revolution in Iran . His downfall provoked the radical Islamic revolution .
 Jacobo Arbenz, the labor-friendly and democratically elected leader of the country, was going toe to toe with other corporate interests such as the Rockefeller/Sullivan/Sullivan &amp; Cromwell associated company United Fruit . United Fruit is a major fruit company .
 Arbenz was pushing for reform that sought to curtail the neo-colonial power of United Fruit . He sought to provide more in resources for the people of Guatemala by providing more resources .
 To the Dulles brothers and other Wall Street types with vested interests, this was unacceptable . This was unacceptable and was to be depicted as nothing short of communism . To the West, it was depicted as something short of communist .
 Arbenz was ousted from the country in what was largely a psychological warfare operation . Arbeniz was ousted by the government in a psychological operation .
 He was replaced with a ruthless dictator by the name of Castillo Armas . The dictator was replaced by a brutal dictator .
 The CIA provided the Armas regime with death lists of all Arbenz government members and sympathizers . Tens of thousands of people either were brutally killed or went missing at the hands of the dictatorship .
 This constant state of upheaval, terror and violence did not subside until a U.N. resolution took hold in 1996 . The United Nations resolution took place in 1996 after a series of violent incidents occurred .
 Hillary Clinton has advocated for the same interventionist foreign policy machine created by the likes of the Dulles brothers . Hillary Clinton, whether she knows it or not, it&amp;rsquo;s a big stretch .
 In fact, she actually made Trump look Kennedyesque in this regard, no mean feat .
 Clinton refers to her vote for the Iraq War as a &amp;ldquo;mistake, but it certainly doesn't seem like one considering the context of her other decisions as Secretary of State . Nowadays, she refers to it as a mistake but it seems not one considering
 Secretary Clinton's friendships with Henry Kissinger and Madeleine Albright raised eyebrows in progressive circles . Secretary Clinton&amp;rsquo;s friendships with Kissinger and Albright have raised eyebrows .
 Kissinger's record was one of the worst in U.S. history when it came to bloody, sociopathic, interventionist policy around the globe . Kissinger was Secretary of State/National Security Adviser .
 Kissinger would nonchalantly give President Nixon death tallies in the thousands regarding Vietnamese citizens as if they were some Stalinesque statistic . Kissinger would not be surprised at the deaths of Vietnamese citizens in Vietnam .
 Kissinger agreed to expand that war in unprecedented way into Cambodia and Laos . Kissinger then agreed to conceal these colossal air war actions . Kissinger tried to conceal the massive air war .
 This was a further reversal and expansion of the war, which went beyond what Lyndon Johnson had done in the wake of JFK&amp;rsquo;s death . Of course, this was further expansion of that war .
 President Kennedy's stated policy was to withdraw from Indochina by 1965 . President Kennedy&amp;rsquo;s stated policy would be to withdraw by 1964 .
 Kissinger was also an instrumental force for the CIA coup in Chile, which ended in the death of Salvador Allende . Augusto Pinochet was also a force behind Pinochet's overthrow of Allende in Chile .
 About Allende, he allegedly said he did not understand why the USA should stand by and let Chile go communist just because the citizenry were irresponsible enough to vote for it . He said he didn't understand why U.S. shouldn't stand by .
 The CIA overthrow of Allende led to years of brutal fascism under military dictator Augusto Pinochet . Allende was overthrown by the CIA in 1973 .
 Madeleine Albright demonstrated similar hawkishness . Clinton &amp; Albright was a hawk-watcher . Albright had a hawkish reputation .
 When asked about the refusal of the United States to lift UN Sanctions against Iraq and the resulting deaths of 500,000 Iraqi children, Albright stated that the deaths had been &amp;ldquo;worth it . Albright's statement was met with stunned surprise .
 At that time, riots and demonstrations against the brutal Indonesian dictator Suharto were raging all over the archipelago . There were mock funerals being conducted, and his figure was being burned in effigy .
 Albright and the Clinton administration had a prime opportunity to cut off relations with a despot who looted his nation to the tune of billions of dollars . Here was the prime opportunity for Albright to cut ties with the despot .
 President Barack Obama has been criticized for his handling of the White House . He has been accused of being a racist and sexist in the past .
 Even in the last two days of Suharto&amp;rsquo;s reign, when major cities were in flames, Albright chose to sit on the sidelines . Senators John Kerry and the late Paul Wellstone were asking the State Department to get on the right side of
 Suharto came to power as a result of a reversal of President Kennedy&amp;rsquo;s foreign policy . In this regard, let us recall that Suharta came . to power in a reversal . President Kennedy's foreign policy reversal .
 Achmed Sukarno had been backed by President Kennedy throughout his first term, all the way up to his assassination . He was backed by the president throughout the first term of his presidency .
 After Suharto resigned, the Robert F Kennedy Memorial Center wrote a letter to his successor asking for an investigation of the role of the military in suppressing the demonstrations that led to his fall .
 Hillary Clinton displayed an American imperiousness during her time as Secretary of State . Hillary Clinton's time as secretary of state was akin to the previous examples of the previous example .
 Whether the former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's intentions in Libya were aimed at ending what she called a &amp;ldququo;genocidal&amp;rdquo;" regime under Gaddafi doesn't really matter .
 The power vacuum in Syria paved the way for a dangerous political power vacuum . Islamic extremists are vying for power, including Islamic extremists .
 It is safe to say that she left Libya in such a shambles that the U.S. had to reenter the civil war . Libya is now in a state of war, but it is not clear what happened to Libya .
 Clinton’s decision to arm Syrian rebels against Bashar al Assad has also helped create bloody conflict with no end sight . Clinton &amp;rsquo;s decision . to arm Syria has also created bloody conflict .
 Bombings occur on a daily basis, especially in areas like Aleppo, leaving tens of thousands dead . Tens of thousands of innocents are killed in bombings .
 As a candidate, she wanted to establish a .ldquo;no-fly zone over Syria as a . candidate . She wanted a similar zone over Libya as she did in Libya .
 This was a euphemism for controlling the air so that U.S. proxies could control the ground . The air was controlled so that the ground could be controlled by American proxies .
 That would have led to fundamentalist dominance in Syria, resembling the endgames in Iraq and Libya . And as many suspect, and as alluded to in the above-linked story, that likely would have been the case .
 Secretary Clinton's policy regarding Latin America, another topic avoided by the media during the last election cycle, also demonstrates knowing or unknowing complicity with colonial/imperial interests . But beyond that, this would probably have ended up provoking Russia, since Russia backs Assad .
 In Colombia, a petroleum company by the name of Pacific Rubiales has been at the center of a humanitarian controversy . The company has ties to the Clinton Foundation .
 The fact that Pacific Rubiales is connected with the Clinton Foundation isn't the main issue, however. The fact is the fact that it's connected to the foundation isn&amp;rsquo;t the main question, however .
 The real problem is the manner in which positions were changed on Clinton&amp;rsquo;s part in exchange for contributions, Clinton says . Clinton: "The real problem" is the way the Clinton administration handled the situation, he says .
 During the 2008 election season, then-Senator Clinton opposed the trade deal that allowed companies like Pacific Rubiales to violate labor laws in Colombia .
 Clinton's family was forging a financial relationship with Pacific Rubiales, the company at the center of Colombia&amp;rsquo;s labor strife . Clinton's State Department was lauding Colombia's human rights record at the time of the crisis .
 The Clintons were developing commercial ties with the oil giant&amp;rsquo;s founder, Frank Giustra, who now occupies a seat on the board of the Clinton Foundation . Clinton Foundation is family's global philanthropic empire .
 Clinton abruptly changed her position on the controversial U.S.-Colombia trade pact . The former Secretary also played a role in the 2009 coup that ousted the democratically elected and progressive human rights administration of Manuel Zelaya in Honduras .
 Recent editions of Clinton&amp;rsquo;s autobiography Hard Choices have been redacted to conceal the full extent of her role in the overthrow of the West .
 Since the coup, government-sponsored death squads have returned to the country, killing hundreds of citizens, including progressive activists like Berta C&amp;aacute;ceres .
 Before her assassination, C&amp;aacute;ceres berated Secretary Clinton for the role she played in overthrowing Zelaya . The U.S.-backed coup in Honduras demonstrates the ongoing trend of outsourcing when it comes to intelligence work .
 A private group called Creative Associates International was involved in determining the social networks responsible for violence in the country&amp;rsquo;s largest city . A private entity subcontracted work to another private entity called Caerus .
 Caerus was previously involved in a $15 million U.S. AID program that helped determine stability in Afghanistan . A man by the name of David Kilcullen was involved in the program . He is the head of the organization .
 Kilcullen &amp;rsquo;s associate, William Upshur, also contributed to the Honduras plans . Upshur: "The Honduran people are not going to be surprised"
 Upshur now works for Booz Allen Hamilton, another private company involved in U.S. intelligence funding . Upshur is now working for another private firm involved in United States intelligence funding.
 Tim Shorrock explained how substantial this kind of funding is . In his 2007 book, Tim
 70 percent of the government&amp;rsquo;s 60-billion-dollar budget for intelligence is now subcontracted to private entities such as Booz Allen Hamilton or Science Applications International Corporation .
 Puerto Rico, a country in the midst of a serious debt crisis, is another key topic when it comes to Clinton&amp;rsquo;s questionable foreign policy decisions . Puerto Rico's debt crisis is also a key topic .
 Hedge funds own much of Puerto Rico&amp;rsquo;s massive debt, and a piece of legislation was put forward to deal with the issue . Bernie Sanders has rightly been labeled by Bernie Sanders as a form of colonialism .
 The bill already imposes a $4.25 minimum wage clause for citizens under 25 . The bill adds to the state's minimum wage law .
 This may serve as no surprise, being that the former Secretary of State receives hefty sums from Wall Street institutions like Goldman Sachs . Goldman Sachs, who benefit from this form of vulture capitalism, is a major Wall Street institution .
 I am not asserting that Hillary Clinton is solely responsible for these foreign policy decisions, but that she has been complicit with the American Deep State that commits or is heavily involved in these operations . Hillary Clinton has not been accused of being responsible for the actions of the Deep State .
 We have to move away as quickly as possible from policy compromised by corporate influence if we truly want to move forward . If the results of this 2016 election, and the success of both Trump and Sanders in the primaries, teach us something, it is that we must move away .
 The American public has clearly had enough with establishment politics, says Sen. Ted Cruz . Sen. Cruz: "The American public is tired of establishment politics"
 With the election of Donald Trump, the viability of establishment politics has been seriously breached . The election effectively ends the age of lesser-evil voting by the proletariat . III With Trump's election of 2016, the future of American politics is under way .
 Although Hillary Clinton was the preferred candidate regarding things like social issues and scientific issues, it wasn't enough to tame the massive insurgency of citizens who were so fed up with the status quo that they would rather see the country go up in flames than vote for more of the same .
 The Democratic vote did not inspire an overlooked independent voter base to come out and make a substantial difference in the Democratic vote . Neither did it inspire a significant independent voter turnout .
 In the aftermath of this potential disaster of an election, it is our duty, as a collective, to look deeply into some troubling fundamental issues, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: In the wake of the election, we need to look at some troubling issues .
 "Racism, xenophobia and sexism are still very much alive in this country," says David Frum . He says racism and xenophobia are still alive in the UK .
 I will not go so far as to label all Trump supporters as racist, homophobic or sexist . Trump supporters are not racist or sexist, but they are not homophobic or homophobic .
 "I have tried to remain receptive to their frustrations. And throughout the primary/general election season, I have ... tried to stay receptive to them," he said .
 Based on my experiences of this election season alone, these sentiments do indeed exist . However, I can most certainly tell you that, based on my own experiences, they do exist . I can't tell you anything more .
 During a delegate selection process for the Bernie Sanders campaign, I met and ended up having discussions with some Trump supporters . Trump supporters are some of the most vocal supporters of Bernie Sanders .
 I asked them questions about why they thought Trump would make a good president, all the while disagreeing with them, but listening nonetheless . I also asked them why they think Trump would be a good candidate for president .
 One man seemed to be bursting at the seams with frustration over what he thought were the main problems with the country . Two of the men I was speaking with were very civil, but one was very angry .
 While ignoring the facts he was presenting him regarding corporate welfare, this man went into relentless diatribes about why his label for Hispanic people, were wreaking havoc . The man was ignoring facts he had presented him with about corporate welfare .
 He exhibited no shame in expressing his distaste for other ethnicities either . He was not ashamed of expressing his dislike of other people in the United States .
 During this dismaying exchange, I brought up the continued mistreatment of Native American peoples . During this . exchange, the president said, "I brought up ... the continued . mistreatment" of Native Americans .
 In response, this man tried to question the severity of the atrocities committed against them . He even went so far as to imply that my use of the term genocide in describing their plight was incorrect, he said .
 This may well serve to exemplify the hateful attitudes of mistrust and resentment that have been put under a black light during the course of this election . Steve Mnuchin is the Treasury Secretary and Treasury Secretary of New York .
 Donald Trump is the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in New York City, New York, New Jersey . The president is expected to address the nation's economic woes in the coming weeks .
 Trump channeled the frustration of a destitute middle class and converted it into unconstructive anger . To paraphrase Bernie Sanders, Trump was able to channel the anger of the middle class .
 Trump made references to how the establishment was a major problem, but didn't describe in detail what was to be done to correct it . He didn&amp;ldquo;t ever describe what to do to fix it .
 With references to a wall with Mexico and mass deportations, he encouraged the belief in his supporters that minorities were ruining the country . Instead, with his references to the wall with . Mexico and to mass deportation, he . encouraged the . belief in the belief . that minorities are ruining the
 Many of the Trump cabinet appointees are among the most Establishment type figures one could imagine . Yet in spite of his campaign promise to &amp;ldquo;drain the swamp, many of the appointees have been Establishment figures .
 Steve Mnuchin, the former Goldman Sachs executive famous for foreclosures and hedge fund deals, has been appointed Secretary of Treasury . He is known for his fore-closing and hedge-fund deals .
 The election of Donald Trump, who can&amp;rsquo;t seem to expound any of his policies in any sort of detail, is openly demeaning towards women, people of other races, and the disabled .
 These politicians are wildly out of touch with the needs of the average American, says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: "These politicians are . wildly out-of-touch" He says they are out of . touch with people's needs .
 This created a very wide alley that the new Trump managed to rumble through . The new president is expected to be the first lady of the White House to take office .
 Some commentators have claimed there can be little doubt there was little doubt that there was a liberal disillusionment following President Obama&amp;rsquo;s election .
 Hillary Clinton could not convince enough people that she was even the .amp;ldquo;change candidate that Obama was . Hillary Clinton failed to convince enough voters that she would be even a .change candidate .
 Citizens had to find alternate sources of information outside of corporate influenced organizations . Corporations won&amp;rsquo;t admit to the public that they are subservient to the same big money interests .
 This explains the rise of figures like Rush Limbaugh, Glenn Beck, and even rightwing populist/conspiracy demagogue Alex Jones . Limbaugh, Beck, Jones, Limbaugh and Jones are examples of rightwing populists .
 Their collective answer is to paint minorities and welfare recipients as the principal ills of U.S. society . They fail to recognize the deep connection between government policy and corporate influence .
 This election warns us that when the real reasons behind government dysfunction are ignored and go unchallenged, one risks the upsurge of fascist sentiments . In short, this election warns .
 Sanders could have neutralized Trump&amp;rsquo;s appeal among the shrinking working and middle classes, which he earned by invoking the need for tariffs and the threat of trade wars .
 Trump broke through the supposed Democratic firewall in the Mideast states like Wisconsin, Iowa, Michigan and Ohio . This was another reason for Trump's popularity in the Middle East .
 A Democratic presidential candidate appeared to favor a globalization policy that began decades ago with David Rockefeller . Rockefeller &amp;mdash;a policy that was resisted by President Kennedy. President Kennedy resisted that policy . Rockefeller and Kennedy were both opposed to globalization .
 Carl Jung would have called it &amp;mdash; meaning all the darker, repressed aspects of the unconscious that, when ignored, can result in psychological backlash . But I think we must go beyond simple awareness when it comes to confronting our nation's collective shadow .
 An exploration of our past guided by a concept that Peter Dale Scott labels &amp;ldquo;Deep Politics can help us come to terms, in a more profound way, with the problems facing us, he says .
 This concept embraces all of the machinations occurring beneath the surface of government activity and which go unnoticed in common analysis, such as in news reports or textbooks . This concept is called the "government machinations"
 Political practices and arrangements, deliberate or not, are usually repressed rather than acknowledged . Or, as Scott states in his 2015 book The American Deep State, it &amp;ldquo;&amp;llip;hilip;involves all those political practices .
 The 1965 Gulf of Tonkin Incident provided a motive, or casus belli, to escalate the Vietnam War into a full-scale invasion by U.S. ground forces . One example of a &amp;ldquo;Deep Event is the #Deep Event .
 President Johnson had already approved the build-up of combat troops in Vietnam in 1964 . President Kennedy had already, in stark contrast to President Kennedy&amp;rsquo;s policy, approved the building-up . All that was needed was some sort of impetus in order for United
 As the author describes, many of the intelligence reports received by the Johnson administration regarding this supposed incident did not signal any sort of instigation on North Vietnam&#039;s behalf . The author describes how intelligence reports regarding the supposed incident were not accurate .
 North Vietnam engaged in an act of war against the United States. However, those same reports were ignored in order to claim that the U.S. had engaged in war against North Vietnam .
 CIA, corporate and State Department interference in the economic and governmental affairs of foreign nations . Other examples of Deep Events include the previously mentioned instances of CIA and State Dept. interference in foreign affairs .
 It is evident that these coups did not occur for the sake of saving other countries from the grip of communism or the reign of dictators; such would only be at best a surface explanation . Such would be only the surface explanation for the coups, such as saving other nations from communism
 A nexus of corporate, military, paramilitary, government and, sometimes underworld elements had a vested interest in the outcome . The deeper explanation is that a nexus of . corporate, . military, . paramilitary, and, . sometimes, government . elements had an interest in . the outcome, says
 Bush administration lies regarding Saddam Hussein's alleged arsenal of weapons of mass destruction presented to the American people and Congress as a reason to invade Iraq . The Bush administration could most certainly be classified as a Deep Event .
 No entities benefitted more from America&amp;rsquo;s long-term occupation of Iraq than companies like Halliburton, Cheney and others, like Cheney, helped .
 It behooves us to inquire more deeply into this historically critical event, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Anyone who still buys into the government version of events regarding the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy is either not looking carefully enough, or is not really familiar with the case, says author .
 A suggestive point of departure for such an inquiry is the parallels between the 2016 election and that of 1968 . The parallels between 2016 and the 1968 election are also suggestive .
 In the wake of the assassination of Martin Luther King in April of 1968, racial tensions were high and a presidential primary season was in full swing . The assassination occurred in the aftermath of the 1968 assassination of King .
 Opposition towards the Vietnam War was strong and one candidate represented the last best hope for minorities, anti-war voters, and the middle, as well as lower classes .
 Robert Kennedy was likely to be the Democratic candidate to run against Richard Nixon in the general election in June 1968 . The candidate was Robert Kennedy, who died in 1968 .
 Robert Kennedy was assassinated when he walked into the kitchen pantry of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles . He was assassinated moments after making his victory speech for the California primary .
 In those moments, the Sixties ended&amp;mdash;and so did the populist hopes and dreams for a new era . The Sixties also ended, but so did so as did the hopes and hopes of a new generation .
 The 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago was attended by the protests of disillusioned voters who felt cheated out of a more liberal, populist candidate . The protests of the 1968 DNC in Chicago were attended by protesters who wanted a more populist candidate.
 Hubert Humphrey was receiving flack for not taking a strong enough stance on the situation in Vietnam . He was selected as the nominee for the Nobel Prize for Peace Prize .
 There were many dissatisfied delegates and voters at the 2016 Philadelphia Democratic convention . There were also many dissatisfied voters and delegates at the convention .
 Their actions were kept hidden off screen in a tightly controlled operation .
 The threat of stripping them of their credentials was often used to suppress any protest on the convention floor . And the threat of being stripped of credentials was also often used .
 In 2016, Hillary Clinton was nominated and her candidacy helped give us Donald Trump . Hillary Clinton ran for president in 2016, but she failed to win the White House nomination .
 The New Deal, anti-globalist policies of John Kennedy and Franklin Roosevelt led to massive loss of life in Vietnam, Cambodia and Cambodia . But the subsequent results included the massive increase in death tolls from the Vietnam War .
 In fact, Nixon had been part of the effort to purge New Deal elements from the government during the McCarthy era . Voorhis, defeated by Nixon's smear campaign, had been a New Deal supporter .
 Nixon contributed to the growing, exaggerated fear of communism in the U.S. Whether it was conducting hearings on men like Alger Hiss and making accusations of Soviet spycraft, Nixon contributed . Nixon's California Senate campaign falsely accused incumbent Congressman Jerry Voorhis of being a communist .
 This fear allowed men like Allen Dulles to be seen as pragmatists in the face of supposed communist danger . Dulles was seen as a pragmatist in the fight against communism .
 Dulles' dirty deeds on behalf of corporate power were carried out under the guise of protecting the world from communism . Dulles &amp;rsquo;s dirty deeds carried out in the name of protecting communism, he says .
 It is ironic that Nixon ended up distrusting the CIA, the institution so closely associated with Allen Dulles . Dulles had championed Nixon's rise to power as both a congressman and senator .
 Bernie Sanders represented the New Deal aspirations of a working class tired of corporate-run politics . Bernie Sanders represents the working class in a working-class America . Sanders represented a New Deal of the 1930s and 1940s .
 The political spectrum has shifted far to the right as compared to 1968, this year&amp;rsquo;s election results are more extreme . This year's election results were more extreme than in 1968 .
 Donald Trump's cabinet appointments reflect his extremist mentality, writes CNN Opinion Polls . Vice Presidential pick Mike Pence is so out of touch with reality that he has tried to argue that women shouldn&amp;rsquo;t work .
 In 1997, Pence stated that women should stay home because otherwise their kids would get the short end of the emotional stick . The soon to be Vice President Pence also sees LGBT rights as a sign of society collapse .
 Trump appears to be off the grid when it comes to the political or Deep Political apparatus . His recent choices for cabinet positions are some of the worst imaginable for the populist of any ilk .
 In some cases he has actually leapt into the arms of the very establishment he warned his supporters against . He has actually jumped in the arms he warned supporters against against .
 In the face of all this, Sanders continues to inspire his followers to remain politically active .
 Vermont senator has urged that true change lies in us having the courage to do things ourselves when it comes to reforming government . We all need to be involved more than ever, he says .
 The more we stay involved, the less likely it will be that the momentum created by political movements will be squandered in the wake of a setback . The more people stay involved in the movement, the more likely it is that it will not be wasted .
 The major setbacks of the 1960s came in the form of assassinations of inspiring political leaders . The assassinations were the result of the assassination of some of the country's most prominent politicians .
 Even in the wake of such tragedies it is possible, indeed imperative, to find a glimmer of hope . Yet even in the aftermath of these tragedies, there is still hope for humanity .
 To do so, however, requires an insight afforded by a critical analysis of the past, and its continuities with the present . To do this requires, as this essay has been arguing, to do so .
 The touchstone for this historical understanding, I believe, lies precisely in the way the policies of President Kennedy have been consistently overturned by subsequent administrations . President Kennedy's policies have been overturned by successive administrations, he says .
 As mentioned above, John Kennedy was not in favor of the neo-colonialist policies of the Dulles/Eisenhower era . V. Kennedy did not want to be part of the colonialists .
 Kennedy believed that the resources of foreign nations rightly belonged to their people . Kennedy believed strongly that the right to self-determination was critical, as evident in 1957 speech on French colonialism in Algeria .
 In the aftermath of a CIA-assisted coup to assassinate Patrice Lumumba, the nationalist leader of the Congo, President Kennedy fought alongside the United Nations to ensure that a nationwide coalition government was formed .
 Civil war was imminent as militant and corporately complicit leaders like Colonel Mobutu vied for power and promoted the secession of Katanga, the region of Congo that held vast amounts of mineral resources . Civil war in Congo was imminent .
 JFK supported the more centrist elements of the potential coalition government . JFK felt that the resources of Katanga didn't belong to Belgian, U.S. or British mining interests .
 The President&amp;rsquo;s death ended hope for the pursuit of any stable government in Congo, along with the hope of halting widespread violence . The death of President Congo's President Laurent Laurent Laurent Kofi Annan ended hope of a stable government .
 It should be noted that Nixon actually welcomed Mobutu to the White House after he took control of Congo . Nixon actually did it, and it's not surprising that he welcomed him there .
 President Kennedy also worked towards re-establishing a relationship with Indonesia and its leader Achmed Sukarno . As noted previously, President Kennedy worked at the White House to try and improve relations .
 This was after the Dulles brothers had been involved in attempts to overthrow the Indonesian leader . The brothers were involved in an attempt to overthrow Indonesia's president .
 Decades earlier, it had been discovered by corporate backed explorers that certain areas in Indonesia contained extremely dense concentrations of minerals such as gold and copper .
 After Kennedy was killed, Sukarno was overthrown with help of the CIA in one of the bloodiest coup d&amp;rsquo; &amp;eacute;tats ever recorded . The coup was one of one of America's bloodiest coups d
 Hundreds of thousands of Indonesians perished during both the overthrow and the subsequent reign of the new leader Suharto . Hundreds of millions perished during the overthrow of the government .
 President Ford and Secretary of State Kissinger traveled to Jakarta and gave Suharto an implicit OK to invade East Timor in December 1975 . In December of 1975, Ford and Kissinger journeyed to Jakarta to give the Indonesian president the OK .
 Hillary Clinton and her husband were involved in the tradition of Hillary Clinton . This is the tradition that Hillary Clinton's husband and Hillary Clinton were involved with. Hillary Clinton was involved with the tradition .
 Bill Clinton was still meeting with Suharto in the late nineties, when almost every democratically elected western nation was shunning him . In the late 90s, Bill Clinton still met with him in Indonesia .
 President Kennedy&amp;rsquo;s policies regarding Central and South America were also a threat to corporate interests . President Kennedy's policies regarding the region were also an issue of corporate interests, he says .
 David Rockefeller took it upon himself to publicly criticize Kennedy&amp;rsquo;s Alliance for Progress . The Alliance was established to aid less developed nations, like those south of the U.S., to become economically self-reliant . Rockefeller criticized the alliance for helping less developed
 President Kennedy facilitated an agreement between steel workers and their corporate executives . After President Kennedy had facilitated the agreement, the latter welshed on the deal . The deal was a result of a dispute between workers and executives .
 It was assumed that the workers would agree to not have their wages increased in exchange for the price of steel also remaining static .
 After the agreement was reached, United States Steel defied the President&amp;rsquo;s wishes and announced a price increase . After the deal reached, U.S. Steel announced an increase in its prices .
 The corporate elite wanted Kennedy to buckle, but instead, he threatened to investigate them for price-fixing and to have his brother Bobby examine their tax returns . Kennedy threatened to have the corporate elite examined their tax records .
 Begrudgingly, United States Steel backed off and accepted the original terms . The original terms of the deal were agreed by the steel giant .
 Kennedy &amp;rsquo;s policies, both domestic and foreign, were aimed at enhancing social and economic progress . Kennedy&amp;rquo.;s policies are aimed at . enhancing social . and economic . progress .
 JFK sought to use government powers to protect the masses from corporate domination . Like Alexander Hamilton, and Albert Gallatin, JFK wanted to use the government to help the masses .
 His tax policy was aimed at channeling investment into the expansion of productive means or capital .
 The investment tax credit, for instance, provided incentives for business entities that enhanced their productive abilities through investment in the upkeep or updating of equipment inside the U.S.
 Kennedy's policies were focused on strengthening production and labor power . His opponents in the Morgan/Rockefeller world focused on sheer profit, he says . His policies were aimed at strengthening production, labor power and strengthening labor .
 It should serve as no surprise that the media outlets responsible for condemning the president were tied to the very corporate and political establishment entities being threatened . David Rockefeller &amp; Henry Luce in 1962 .
 The Kennedy Presidency, the elite of Wall Street, media executives and certain powerful political persons or groups were so interconnected as to be inbred . The Kennedy presidency, Wall Street and media executives are so interconnected that they are inbred as well .
 John Kennedy wasn't only trying to curtail corporate power with his Hamilton/Gallatin, New Deal-like economic policies . Kennedy wasn&amp;rsquo;t trying to curb corporate power, he says . Kennedy was trying to reduce corporate power in the wake of the Second World
 His decisions concerning military engagement abroad were greatly at odds with the hard-line Cold Warriors of his administration and the Central Intelligence Agency . His decision to engage in military operations abroad was at odds .
 Kennedy refused to commit U.S. combat troops abroad despite the nagging insistence of his advisors . Time after time, Kennedy .
 President publicly accepted responsibility for the fiasco at the Bay of Pigs . But privately he was livid at the CIA for deceiving him . President accepted responsibility .
 CIA documents show a major deception had occurred in the Bay of Pigs . CIA documents reveal that the Bay was a cover-up for the CIA .
 The Agency had assured Kennedy that their group of anti-Castro Cuban invaders would be the spark that would set off a revolt against Fidel Castro just waiting to happen . The Agency told Kennedy that the invasion would set up a revolt .
 CIA-backed Cubans were outnumbered by Castro&amp;rsquo;s forces 10 to 1 . This was not the case, and the CIA backed Cubans are outnumbered by the Castro forces, says CNN's John Sutter .
 CIA stocked the invading force with C-Level operatives, Kirkpatrick report says . Even worse, the CIA had stocked the C-level operatives in the force .
 It was almost as if the surface level plan presented to the President was designed to fail in order to force his hand and commit the military into invading Cuba . President Obama was presented with a plan that failed to force him to invade Cuba .
 A declassified CIA memo acknowledges the fact that securing the desired beach area in Cuba was not possible without military intervention . The memo was released in July 2013 .
 Kennedy refused to commit U.S. troops as the operation crumbled . He became public enemy number one in the CIA&amp;rsquo;s eyes .
 This sentiment that Kennedy was soft on communism, or even a communist sympathizer, was augmented as he continued to back away from military intervention in other situations .
 The President reached an agreement with the Soviet Union to keep Laos neutral . Despite his willingness to send advisors to Vietnam, he ultimately worked to enact a policy resulting in the withdrawal of all United States personnel .
 Kennedy &amp;rsquo;s assassination ended this movement toward disengagement from Saigon . Kennedy&amp;rquo ;s assassination ends this movement .
 President's attempts at d&amp;eacute;tente with Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union and Cuba's Fidel Castro were likely worse . What was likely even worse to the Cold Warriors and CIA patriots during this time was the President’s attempts at
 Discussion moved toward talks about d&amp;eacute;tente; despite the fact that the two countries had differing views, they agreed it was imperative, for the sake of the planet .
 JFK &amp;rsquo;s unwillingness to bomb Cuba during the Missile Crisis were nothing short of traitorous to the U.S. military power structure . This, along with JFK’s unwillingness . to bomb Cuban during the missile Crisis, was nothing short . of traitor
 In the final months of his life, the President extended a secret olive branch toward Fidel Castro in hopes of opening a dialogue . The President also extended an olive branch to Fidel Castro .
 Castro was painfully upset when he got word of Kennedy&amp;rsquo;s assassination . Excited by the prospect, Castro was excited about the prospect .
 Kennedy most certainly had his enemies, and was making decisions that drove a stake into the very heart of corporate, military and intelligence collusion . Kennedy's decisions were made in a bid to expose collusion between the U.S. and the world .
 If he had been elected President, Bobby Kennedy was most certainly going to continue, and most likely even expand, the policies of his late brother . Bobby Kennedy would continue to expand, even if he was elected .
 Like Jack and Bobby, Martin Luther King and Malcolm X expressed opposition toward the continuation of the Vietnam War .
 The concept of Deep Politics may provide a helpful alternative to the term conspiracy theory, which has become so stigmatized and so overused as to be meaningless .
 Abandoning the idea of conspiracy altogether, however, risks throwing the baby out with the bath water, writes Andrew Hammond . It raises legitimate questions about what lurks beneath the surface of the affairs of state .
 The enemies that John and Robert Kennedy were facing were not fictional or hypothetical . The enemies were not some fictional or . hypothetical &amp;ldquo;illuminati . group or groups .
 "They were very real, dangerous and powerful interests, and those forces were still with us in 2016," says President Obama . "Those forces were real and dangerous, and they were very powerful," he says .
 Deep Politics does not imply that there is some singular group or set of groups that meet in secret to plot colossal calamities that affect the entire world, but rather that the events themselves arise from the milieu created by a congruence of unaccountable, supra-constitutional, covert,
 A more recent example would be the networking of several of these interests to orchestrate the colossal Iran/Contra project . The Iran-Contra operation was a major project in the 1980s .
 Other writers have also described these subterranean forces using other terms .
 Al Gore won the 2000 election in Florida from Al Gore in 2000 . Al Gore lost the 2000 presidential election to George W. Bush in Florida in '96 .
 He then wrote a book explaining how the term &amp;ldququo;conspiracy theorist became a commonly used smear to disarm critics of the Warren Commission .
 Dulles era saw covert, corporate power developed into a well-oiled and unaccountable machine running roughshod . Whether it be extralegal assassinations, unwarranted domestic surveillance, interventionist wars at the behest of corporate interests, torture or other activities of that stripe, these
 These forces have continued to operate regardless of who is elected president, whether Democrat or Republican . These forces continue to operate even if the president is elected .
 It is my opinion that we must come to terms with these dark or, to use James W Douglass, term, &amp;ldquo; term, is dark or to use the term 'dark' It is also possible that we have to accept the realities of life in
 "We must do so in a holistic way if we are to take more fundamental steps toward progress as a nation," says President Obama . "We need to take a holistic approach to our future," says Obama .
 George Orwell coined the term Crime Stop to describe the psychological mechanism by which humans ignore uncomfortable or dangerous thoughts . Orwell's Crime Stop was coined by Orwell in the 1930s to describe how people ignore uncomfortable thoughts .
 Crime Stop mechanism is at work in the subconscious of many Americans, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Crime Stop is a crime-prevention mechanism, he says .
 We need to be willing to face the darker aspects of our recent past that have been at work below the surface and percolating up into view for many years . We must face the dark aspects of the recent past, says author .
 Donald Trump has now given way to Donald Trump, says Hillary Clinton . "This diluted and uninspiring party has given way," she says .
 As alluded to throughout this essay, this party has abandoned the aims and goals of the Kennedys, King and Malcolm X . It now resembles the GOP more than it does the sum total of those four men .
 To understand what this means in stark political terms, consider the following . Consider the fact that the US President is a candidate for a seat in Congress .
 When Trump enters office, he will be in control of not just the White House, but also the Senate and the House of Representatives . When he becomes president, he is expected to have control of both chambers and the Senate .
 Once he nominates his Supreme Court candidate to replace Antonin Scalia, he will also be in control of that institution . The Supreme Court is a powerful institution .
 Bernie Sanders was the only candidate whose policies recalled the idea of the Democratic party of the Sixties . Bernie Sanders' policies recall the idea that the party was in the 1960s . Sanders was only candidate with policies that recall the party's old roots .
 According to a poll of 1,600 people run by Gravis Marketing, he would have soundly defeated Trump by 12 points . And according to the poll, the poll would have put him 12 points clear .
 The Democrats have to get the message, or they run the risk of becoming a permanent minority party . The Democrats are in danger of becoming permanent minority parties in the United States .
 As a starting point, they can take some of the advice contained in this essay . Take some of this advice from the author of the essay .
 Hillary Clinton snipes at NPR host after defensive gay marriage interview . Hillary Clinton is married to a Republican senator from New Hampshire .
 Allen Dulles, the CIA, and the rise of America&#039;s Secret Government . The CIA was founded by Dulles in the early 1950s .
 Greg Grandin: A Voter&#039;s Guide to Hillary Clinton’s Policies in Latin America . The Nation, 18 April 2016. The Nation .
 Tim Shorrock: How Hillary Clinton Militarized U.S. Policy in Honduras . He says Hillary Clinton's policies have been 'militarized'
 Peter Dale Scott, &quot;The Deep State and the Bias of Official History, 20 January 2015. Who What Why, 20 Jan 2015. Peter Dale . Scott .
 Ben Norton, &quot;Sanders Condemns Pro-austerity &amp;lsquo;Colonial Takeover of Puerto Rico; Clinton Supports It .
 Billion In A Decade. Billion In a Decade . Billion in a decade. Billion in U.S.
 Zawn Villines, &quot;The Four Worst Things Mike Pence Has Said About Women, 21 July 2016 . Daily Kos.com: Mike Pence has said about women .
 Extralegal assassinations, unwarranted domestic surveillance, interventionist wars at the behest of corporate interests, torture or other activities of that stripe – all have their roots in the Dulles era .
 The Republican candidate, now President-elect, has run perhaps the most hate-filled, deplorable campaign in recent memory . He touts himself as a good businessman yet probably couldn't tell you the difference between Keynes and Marx .
 In fact, he compulsively prevaricates and can’t seem to string two cohesive sentences together, he says .
 She was certainly preferable to Trump on domestic issues, e.g., women's rights, race, and overall economic policy . She was also preferable to him on global scientific matters like climate change .
 There are serious problems with Hillary Clinton’s record . Nevertheless, there are serious issues with her record, Hillary Clinton's critics say .
 Up until 2013, she didn’t support same-sex marriage, yet got defensive and lied about the strength of her record on this issue . ‘I’m not a Republican,’ she said, ‘but a Democrat,” she said. �
 Former Secretary of State Clinton continued to dance around that subject as if she still didn't know the public was privy to Comey’s statements . FBI Director James Comey publicly stated that classified material was indeed sent over Clinton's unsecure server . Clinton has been flip-flopping and
 Despite media attention, failings such as these are far from being her main flaw, this author says . This author believes they are a distraction from much deeper issues .
 As previously alluded to, Clinton’s foreign policy bears much more of a resemblance to the Eisenhower/Dulles brothers’ record than it does to what one might expect from someone who describes herself as taking a back seat to no-one when it comes to progressive values .
 Iran's democratically elected leader Mohammed Mossadegh vowed to nationalize his country’s oil and petroleum resources . The Dulles brothers designed a phony overthrow that installed the corporately complicit Reza Shah Pahlavi into power .
 Jacobo Arbenz, the labor-friendly and democratically elected leader of the country, was going toe to toe with other corporate interests such as the Rockefeller/Sullivan & Cromwell associated company United Fruit . United Fruit is a major fruit company in Venezuela .
 The CIA provided the Armas regime with “death lists” of all Arbenz government members and sympathizers . Tens of thousands of people either were brutally killed or went missing at the hands of the dictatorship .
 Hillary Clinton has advocated for the same interventionist foreign policy machine created by the likes of the Dulles brothers . IIHillary Clinton, whether she knows it or not, has pushed for interventionist interventionism in the past .
 Clinton refers to her vote for the Iraq War as a “mistake” but it certainly doesn’t seem like one considering the context of her other decisions as Secretary of State . In fact, she actually made Trump look Kennedyesque in this regard, no mean feat .
 Secretary Clinton’s friendships and consultations with Henry Kissinger and Madeleine Albright raised eyebrows in progressive circles . Secretary Clinton's friendships with Kissinger and Albright have raised eyebrows .
 Kissinger’s record as Secretary of State/National Security Adviser was most certainly one of the worst in U.S. history when it came to bloody, sociopathic, interventionist policy around the globe . Kissinger's record was one of his worst in United States history, writes
 Kissinger agreed to expand that war in unprecedented way into Cambodia and Laos . Kissinger then agreed to cover up that war, and then attempted to conceal these colossal air war actions . Kissinger also agreed to extend that war into Cambodia, Laos and Cambodia .
 This was a further reversal and expansion of the war, which went even beyond what Lyndon Johnson had done in the wake of JFK’s death . Of course, this was further reversal of that war, and went further beyond what he had done .
 President Kennedy’s stated policy was to withdraw from Indochina by 1965 . President Kennedy said he would withdraw from the country by 1965.
 Even in the last two days of Suharto’s reign, when major cities were in flames, Albright chose to sit on the sidelines . The State Department was asked to get on the right side of history, but Albright declined .
 Whether the former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's intentions in Libya truly aimed at ending what she called a “genocidal’s regime under Gaddafi doesn’t really matter . Whether she truly aimed to end the ‘genocide’ regime doesn't really matter.
 Clinton’s decision to arm Syrian ‘rebels’ against Bashar al Assad has also helped create bloody conflict with no end in sight . It is safe to say that she left Libya in such a shambles that the USA had to reenter the civil war .
 As a candidate, she wanted to establish a “no-fly zone” over Syria . She wanted to established a ‘no- fly zone’ over Syria, much as she did in Libya .
 This would probably have ended up provoking Russia, since Russia backs Assad . But beyond that, this would probably end up provoking the Russian-backed regime .
 The fact that Pacific Rubiales is connected with the Clinton Foundation isn't the main issue, however, . The Clinton Foundation is also connected to the Clinton foundation . The foundation has been criticized for its ties to the foundation .
 The real problem is the manner in which positions were changed on Clinton’s part in exchange for contributions, Clinton says . Clinton's position was changed on the part of the Clinton administration, he says . The Clinton administration has been criticized for accepting contributions to the Clinton campaign .
 Clinton’s family was forging a financial relationship with Pacific Rubiales, the sprawling Canadian petroleum company at the center of Colombia's labor strife . Clinton's State Department was lauding Colombia's human rights record at the time .
 The Clintons were developing commercial ties with the oil giant’s founder, Canadian financier Frank Giustra, who now occupies a seat on the board of the Clinton Foundation . The Clintons also developed commercial ties .
 Recent editions of Clinton’s autobiography Hard Choices have been redacted to conceal the full extent of her role in the overthrow of the Soviet Union .
 Government-sponsored death squads have returned to the country, killing hundreds of citizens, including progressive activists like Berta Cáceres . Since the coup, and in opposition to the supposed goals of the overthrow itself, government-sponsored deaths have returned .
 A private group called Creative Associates International was involved in ‘determining the social networks responsible for violence in the country’s largest city,’ and subcontracted work to another private entity called Caerus .
 Kilcullen’s associate, William Upshur, also contributed to the Honduras plans . Upshur: "The Honduras plans are very important to the United States"
 70 percent of the government’s 60-billion-dollar budget for intelligence is now subcontracted to private entities such as Booz Allen Hamilton or Science Applications International Corporation . Puerto Rico, a country in the midst of a serious debt crisis, is another key topic when it comes
 Hedge funds own much of Puerto Rico’s massive debt, and a piece of legislation was put forward to deal with the issue has rightly been labeled by Bernie Sanders as a form of colonialism .
 With the election of Donald Trump, the viability of establishment politics has been seriously breached . The American public has clearly had enough with establishment politics . The election effectively ends the age of lesser-evil voting .
 Hillary Clinton was the preferred candidate regarding things like social issues and scientific issues, but it wasn't enough to tame the massive insurgency of citizens who were so fed up with the status quo that they would rather see the country possibly go up in flames .
 I will not go so far as to label all Trump supporters as racist, homophobic or sexist . One of these has to do with the fact that racism, xenophobia and sexism are still very much alive in this country .
 This man went into relentless diatribes about why “Tacos”, his label for Hispanic people, were wreaking havoc . While ignoring the facts he was presenting him regarding corporate welfare, this man went in diatribe . He ignored the facts about corporate welfare .
 This may well serve to exemplify the hateful attitudes of mistrust and resentment that have been put under a black light during the course of this election . In response, this man tried to question the severity of the atrocities committed against them and even went so far as to imply that my use of
 Donald Trump is the president of the U.S. House of Representatives in New York City, New York, New Jersey . The president is expected to make a speech at the end of the week .
 Trump made references to how the ‘establishment’ was a major problem, but he didn’t describe in detail what was to be done to correct it . Like many of his policy points, he didn't describe what to do to fix it .
 Many of the Trump cabinet appointees are among the most Establishment type figures one could imagine . Yet in spite of his campaign promise to ‘drain the swamp’, many of the appointees have been Establishment figures .
 The election of a man like Donald Trump, who can’t seem to expound any of his policies in any sort of detail, makes clear that we have a cancerous political system which has metastasized thanks to establishment politicians beholden to corporate interests .
 Some commentators claim there can be little doubt that there was a liberal disillusionment following President Obama’s election . Some commentators have claimed there was little doubt there is little doubt .
 Hillary Clinton could not convince enough people that she was even the ‘change candidate’ that Obama was . Hillary Clinton failed to convince enough voters that she would be a candidate for president in 2012 . Clinton was the last candidate to win the White House .
 Citizens had to find alternate sources of information outside of corporate influenced organizations . Those groups won’t admit to the public that they are subservient to the same big money interests .
 Sanders could have neutralized Trump’s appeal among the shrinking working and middle classes, which he earned by invoking the need for tariffs and the threat of trade wars . Sanders could also neutralize the appeal of the shrinking middle class .
 Trump broke through the supposed Democratic firewall in the Mideast states like Wisconsin, Iowa, Michigan and Ohio . This was another reason for Trump’s popularity in the region .
 A Democratic presidential candidate appeared to favor a globalization policy that began decades ago with David Rockefeller . Rockefeller was resisted by President Kennedy, who was opposed to the policy . Rockefeller and Rockefeller were both prominent figures in the Rockefeller administration .
 Carl Jung would have called it the "shadow," meaning all the darker, repressed aspects of the unconscious that, when ignored, can result in psychological backlash . But we must go beyond simple awareness when it comes to confronting our nation’s collective ‘shadow’
 Peter Dale Scott labels “Deep Politics” a concept that he labels ‘deep politics’ The concept embraces all of the machinations occurring beneath the surface of government activity and which go unnoticed .
 The 1965 Gulf of Tonkin Incident provided a motive, or casus belli, to escalate the Vietnam War into a full-scale invasion by U.S. ground forces . One example of a “Deep Event” is the Gulf ofTonkin Incident .
 President Johnson had already approved the build-up of combat troops in Vietnam in 1964 . All that was needed was some sort of impetus in order for U.S. involvement to move to the next stage .
 CIA, corporate and State Department interference in the economic and governmental affairs of foreign nations . However, those same reports were ignored in order to claim that North Vietnam had engaged in an act of war against the U.S.
 Bush administration's lies regarding Saddam Hussein’s alleged arsenal of “weapons of mass destruction” presented to the American people and Congress as a reason to invade Iraq, could most certainly be classified as a Deep Event .
 No entities benefitted more from America’s long-term occupation of Iraq than Halliburton, says John Avlon . Dick Cheney's company was one of the companies that benefited from the occupation .
 Anyone who still buys into the government version of events regarding the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy is either not looking carefully enough, or is not really familiar with the case . A suggestive point of departure for such an inquiry is the parallels between the 2016 election and that of 1968 .
 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago was attended by the protests of disillusioned voters who felt cheated out of a more liberal, populist candidate . In those moments, the Sixties ended—and so did the populist hopes and dreams for a new era .
 Alger Hiss, the anti-globalist leader of the Vietnam War, died in Cambodia and Vietnam . The Vietnam War was the result of the New Deal policies of Franklin Roosevelt and John Kennedy . Hiss died in Vietnam, Cambodia and Cambodia in the war .
 Dulles' dirty deeds were carried out under the guise of protecting the world from communism . Dulles’ and the CIA’s dirty deeds on behalf of corporate power are carried out in the US .
 Donald Trump’s cabinet appointments reflect this extremist mentality, especially in his Vice Presidential pick Mike Pence . Pence has tried to argue that women shouldn’t be working .
 Despite the fact that Trump appears to be “off the grid”, so to speak, when it comes to the political or Deep Political apparatus, his recent choices for cabinet positions are some of the worst imaginable for the populist of any ilk .
 In some cases he has actually leapt into the arms of the very establishment he warned his supporters against . Sanders continues to inspire his followers to remain politically active .
 John Kennedy was not in favor of the neo-colonialist policies of the Dulles/Eisenhower era . The touchstone for this historical understanding lies precisely in the way the policies of President Kennedy have been overturned by subsequent administrations .
 President Kennedy fought alongside the United Nations to ensure that a nationwide coalition government was formed in the Congo . Kennedy believed strongly that the resources of such nations rightly belonged to their people .
 JFK supported the more centrist elements of the potential coalition government . JFK felt that the resources of Katanga didn’t belong to Belgian, United States or British mining interests .
 The President’s death ended hope for the pursuit of any stable government in Congo, along with the hope of halting widespread violence . The death of the President ended hope of a stable government .
 It should be noted that Nixon actually welcomed Mobutu to the White House after he took control of Congo . Kennedy also worked towards re-establishing a relationship with Indonesia and its leader Achmed Sukarno .
 After Kennedy was killed, Sukarno was overthrown with help of the CIA in one of the bloodiest coup d’états ever recorded . The CIA was involved in the coup d'état, which overthrown the country's president .
 President Kennedy’s policies regarding Central and South America were also a threat to corporate interests . President Kennedy's policies also threatened corporate interests in the region . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 David Rockefeller took it upon himself to publicly criticize Kennedy’s Alliance for Progress, which had been established to aid less developed nations, like those south of the U.S. to become economically self-reliant . Rockefeller was angered by Kennedy's plan to help less developed countries become
 President Kennedy had facilitated an agreement between steel workers and their corporate executives, the latter welshed on the deal . The deal was made by the Morgan/Rockefeller company, a subsidiary of the company .
 After the agreement was reached, United States Steel defied the President’s wishes and announced a price increase . The President's wishes were met with a compromise and a compromise .
 Kennedy’s policies, both domestic and foreign, were aimed at enhancing social and economic progress . Kennedy's policies were both domestic, foreign and international .
 While Kennedy’s policies were focused on strengthening production and labor power, his opponents in the Morgan/Rockefeller world were . The media outlets responsible for condemning the president were tied into the very corporate and political establishment entities being threatened . It should serve as no surprise that the media
 Kennedy wasn’t only trying to curtail corporate power with his Hamilton/Gallatin, New Deal-like economic policies . John Kennedy was also trying to curb corporate power . Kennedy was a New Dealer .
 CIA documents show a major deception had occurred in the Bay of Pigs . CIA documents reveal that the CIA lied about the events in the event of the attack .
 CIA-backed Cubans were outnumbered by Castro’s forces 10 to 1 . This was not the case, and the CIA backed Cuban troops were outnumbered . Castro's forces outnumbered by the CIA- backed troops, according to the report .
 A declassified CIA memo acknowledges the fact that securing the desired beach area in Cuba was not possible without military intervention . Kennedy refused to commit United States troops as the operation crumbled .
 President Kennedy’s assassination ended this movement toward disengagement from Saigon . Kennedy was trying to détente with Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union and Fidel Castro of Cuba .
 Discussion moved toward talks about détente; despite the fact that the two men’s respective countries had differing views, they agreed it was imperative .
 JFK’s unwillingness to bomb Cuba during the Missile Crisis was nothing short of traitorous to the U.S. military power structure . This, along with JFK's unwillingness to attack Cuba, was something of a traitor to the covert and overt military structure of the United States .
 Castro was painfully upset when he got word of Kennedy’s assassination . Castro was excited by the prospect of a Cuban president .
 The concept of Deep Politics may provide a helpful alternative to the term ‘conspiracy theory”, which has become so stigmatized and so overused as to be meaningless . Martin Luther King and Malcolm X expressed opposition toward the continuation of the Vietnam War .
 The enemies that John and Robert Kennedy were facing were not some fictional or hypothetical ‘illuminati” group or groups . The enemies were not fictional or imaginary ‘Illuminati’ groups or groups, they were .
 A more recent example would be the networking of several of these interests to orchestrate the colossal Iran/Contra project . Other writers have described these subterranean forces using other terms .
 The term “conspiracy theorist” became a commonly used smear to disarm critics of the Warren Commission . He then wrote a book explaining how the term ‘conspiracy theory’ became a common smear .
 It is my opinion that we must come to terms with these dark or, to use James W Douglass’ term, ‘unspeakable’ realities . It is a dark or to use the term, to call it ‘Unspeakable,’ we must
 Bernie Sanders was the only candidate whose policies recalled the idea of the Democratic party of the Sixties . Once he nominates his Supreme Court candidate to replace Antonin Scalia, he will be in control of that institution .
 As a starting point, they can take some of the advice contained in this essay . The advice should be given to them as a beginning point .
 Los Angeles-based guitarist Alex Sill received a Bachelor of Fine Arts Degree in the Jazz Program at California Institute of the Arts .
 He has studied and performed with some of the world's top musicians . Has written for a variety of contexts, including film/trailer music, jazz bands, rock bands, orchestra and a guitar trio .
 Alex has been deeply interested in history from an early age . He believes the examples set by John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. can provide a powerful impetus for social and political engagement today .