 Rudy Anderson was flying over Cuba when shot down by SA-2 surface to air missiles . Anderson was shot down in Cuba when he was shot by surface-to-air missiles . He was killed in the Cuban missile strike .
 U-2 reconnaissance aircraft high over Cuba took photos of Soviet missile sites . U.S. Air Force photo shows sites capable of launching nuclear warheads at the United States, just 90 miles away .
 CIA: Moscow wanted to ‘equalize’ threat posed by U.S. missiles in Europe by installing missiles in Cuba . Alexander Orlov, in an account published by the CIA, said Russia wanted to "equalize" the threat posed . Orlov: "Moscow wanted
 The Soviets sent 40,000 troops, 42 MRBMs and 20 nuclear warheads for the missiles . The Soviets also sent 42 MRBM missiles and 20 warheads for missiles .
 Orlov wrote that the Soviets implemented maskirovka –camouflage concealment – measures, but the deployment of combat equipment and troops on such a large scale proved impossible to conceal from prying camera lenses in the sky .
 President John F Kennedy ordered a U-2 flight over Cuba on Oct. 22, 1962 . Based on imagery from Corona satellites that made him suspect a Soviet build-up, he ordered the flight .
 The CIA had developed the U-2 but turned it over to the Air Force in the belief that if details became public world opinion would look more favorably on a military reconnaissance plane than one operated by a civilian intelligence agency .
 Anderson and other U-2 flyers were members of the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing at Laughlin Air Force Base near Del Rio, Texas . Anderson and the other U.2 flyers died in the U.S.
 They were piloting ex-CIA U-2s that had been hastily painted in military colors . The planes had been painted with military colors by the U.S. Navy .
 Richard S “Steve” Heyser completed the first U-2 flight over Cuba, taking off from Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., on Oct. 22, 1962 .
 Heyser landed at McCoy Air Force Base, Fla., from which subsequent U-2 missions were mounted . U-1 mission was the first to carry out a U.2 mission .
 Heyser's images reached analysts of the CIA’s National Photographic Interpretation Center in Maryland and Washington, D.C. The following day, the images were taken in the second story of a used-car dealership .
 He received two awards of the Distinguished Flying Cross for Korea-era flying . He was awarded the D.D.C. for his service in Korea .
 He eventually made more flights over the island nation than anyone else . He eventually flew more than 100 times over island nation .
 He entered the aviation cadet program in 1950, and piloted RF-86A and RF-87F Sabres during the Korean War . He piloted the planes in Korea .
 In later years it was revealed that some RF-86F missions were flown over Chinese and Soviet installations . Some of the missions were carried out over China and Soviet military installations .
 Reconnaissance image shows a medium-range ballistic missile site at San Cristobal de los Banos, Cuba . The site is believed to be the first of its kind .
 Anderson was in the first cohort of airmen – with Heyser – selected to fly the top secret U-2, often flying at altitudes higher than 72,000 feet for extended periods . Anderson was one of the first airmen to fly in the U.S. Air
 Analysts eventually concluded, correctly, that the Soviets were installing both R-12 and R-14 MRBMs . Analysts later concluded that both were installed .
 Analysts greatly underestimated Soviet troop strength and did not know that Soviet commanders in Cuba were given local authority to release nuclear warheads under some circumstances .
 The Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear weapons to repel any U.S. invasion of Cuba . The Soviets deployed tactical nukes to protect Cuba from invasion .
 On Oct. 1962, Kennedy decided on a naval blockade of the island nation . The blockade was a response to a request from President Kennedy .
 Officially, it was a ‘quarantine’ – in legal parlance, a less warlike term than blockade . The blockade was a 'quarantine' - a term that is less war-like than a blockade . It was officially a quarantine, but a blockade was
 A new book claims that the destruction of Anderson’s U-2 was closely linked to the deployment of Soviet nuclear cruise missiles near the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo .
 Behind the scenes, the U.S. negotiated to remove some of its own MRBMs from bases in Turkey if the Soviets would withdraw nuclear arms from Cuba . The United States negotiated to pull out some of the weapons if Cuba withdraws nuclear arms .
 Kennedy sent six Navy RF-8A Crusaders over Cuba looking for Soviet action in Oct. 1962 . Some thought it was an ultimatum to the Soviets .
 Air Force RF-101C Voodoos also made flights over the island . U-2 missions continued to be carried out .
 U.S. forces went to DEFCON 2 alert status, the highest in United States history and one notch below all-out war . On Oct. 31, the United States forces went on DEFCon 2 alert level . The highest alert level in American history .
 The following day, for the first time, surface-to-air missiles were sighted near a U-2 . The following week, the U.2 was sighted in the area again . The U.S. has never seen such a missile sighted before .
 Anderson made a pass over Cuba and was approaching the shoreline when the Soviets fired two surface-to-air missiles at his U-2 . Anderson was shot down by the Soviet Union in Cuba .
 One exploded behind Anderson and sent shrapnel into the cockpit, puncturing his pressure suit . Anderson's pressure suit was punctured by the shrapnel . Anderson was in the cockpit when the explosion occurred .
 His U-2 broke apart, plummeted at least 60,000 feet, and crashed on Cuban soil . The crash was the first of its kind in Cuba . The U.2 crashed in Cuba on June 4 .
 The destruction of Anderson’s U-2 was closely linked to the deployment of Soviet nuclear cruise missiles near the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo . One Minute to Midnight, a new book by former Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs, claims the destruction was linked to Soviet nuclear
 Soviet generals feared the U-2 had uncovered the forward launch position of the cruise missiles, just 15 miles from Guantanamo . The U.2 was believed to have uncovered the launch position .
 The day Anderson died was the day a letter from Nikita Khrushchev proposed a trade of Soviet missiles in Cuba for U.S. missiles in Turkey . Anderson died that day on the day the letter was proposed .
 The following day, Khrushchev announced that he’d agreed to withdraw his missiles from Cuba . The next day, he announced that the Soviet Union had agreed to pull the missiles out .
 Many viewed the crisis as one in which a strong young U.S. president had forced the Soviet leader to back down . The crisis was viewed as one of which the Soviet president had backed down .
 The true situation was more complex and the final result was a compromise, says CNN.com's John Sutter . "The true situation is more complex," he says .
 Anderson will be honored at a city park in Greenville, South Carolina . Anderson died in 2007 at age 60 . Anderson was a member of the Anderson family and friends .
 The park is home to an F-86 aircraft intended as a gesture toward Anderson’s Korea service . The plane on display is the F-87H model, which never reached Korea . Anderson's Korea service ended in 2007 .
 Air Force chief of staff told Heyser Anderson was going to be the hero of the crisis . Curtis LeMay said Anderson was dead and he wasn’t, so Anderson was the hero . LeMay: Anderson was a hero because he wasn't dead .
 Just days after the crisis ended, Heyser was invited to the White House to receive Kennedy’s thanks for taking the photos .
 Anderson became the first recipient of the Air Force Cross, the nation’s second highest award for valor . Air Force accounts gave Heyser and Anderson equal credit for taking the first photos .
 The citation recognizes Anderson for all the U-2 flights he made, not solely the one in which he lost his life . Anderson was awarded the U.2 Medal of Distinguished Flying Companion . The award was given to Anderson in honor of all the flights he had made .
 Heyser and nine other Air Force U-2 pilots who flew missions identical to Anderson’s received the Distinguished Flying Cross . Anderson and nine others were awarded the D.C. honors .
 The U2 and V75 display was at the Museo del Aire in Havana, Cuba . If you Google “George N Teichrib” and click any of my Panoramio links you will find a full spread of the U2/V75 display .