 Kennedy’s supposed bed rest was actually a marathon secret session with advisors to decide upon a response to the Soviet action . Kennedy was supposed to be on bed rest when he was attacked by the Soviets .
 Kennedy chose to blockade Cuba, deciding to bomb the missile sites only if further action proved necessary . The blockade began October 21 and, the next day, Kennedy delivered a public address alerting Americans .
 Khrushchev responded by sending more ships, possibly carrying military cargo, to Cuba . The ships continued construction at the sites, allowing construction to continue in Cuba .
 Dick Fosbury wins gold at the Mexico City Games in 1968 . The 21-year-old Oregonian high-jumps 7 feet 4 1/4 inches at 7.5 inches . The Olympic high jump record was set in Mexico City, Mexico .
 Muammar al-Qaddafi, the longest-serving leader in Africa and the Arab world, is captured and killed by rebel forces . It was also the international debut of Fosbury’s unique jumping jumping jumping jump .
 General Douglas MacArthur returns to the Philippines, fulfilling his promise to return to the area he was forced to flee in 1942 . The eccentric 69-year-old dictator, who came to power in a 1969 coup, headed a government that was accused of corruption .
 Queen Elizabeth II dedicates Sydney Opera House to Queen on October 20, 1973 . MacArthur served as the son of an American Civil War hero, MacArthur served in the U.S.
 The $80 million structure, designed by Danish architect Jørn Utzon, was built on Bennelong Point, in Sydney . It was funded by the profits of the Opera House Lotteries . Mao Zedong arrives in Shensi Province in northwest China with 4,000 survivors
 1973: Solicitor General Robert Bork dismisses Watergate special prosecutor Archibald Cox . Attorney General Richardson and Deputy Attorney General Ruckelshaus resign in protest . After World War II, the Cold War began to heat up in the United States .
 The U.S. Senate ratifies the Louisiana Purchase on October 20, 1803 . The purchase of the territory of Louisiana would double the size of the United States . Cox had conducted a detailed investigation of the Watergate break-in that revealed that Watergate broke out .
 On October 20, 1853, Arthur Rimbaud is born in Charleville, France . Concerns over the flight crew led Aerosmith to look elsewhere . The decision that saved one band but saved another was a decision to choose another .
 Rimbaud was a brilliant student, and his first poem was published in a French review when he was 16 . His first poem, published in French review, was published at 16 years old .