 JFK AND THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS CRISIS . Rhodri Jeffreys-Jones . Robert Weisbrot. Rhodri . Jeffrey .
 It is only honest to confess to one’s prior impressions at the start of a review on a controversial topic . Maybe it is inviting dismissal, but it is only honesty to confess .
 "Treffynnon" always orated on that theme regardless of the evening’s announced topic . Generally, it was a light-hearted affair, with everyone looking forward to the ritual speech by ‘Treffynon’
 We subliminally heeded the imperatives of the “four-minute warning” the government told us we would have of a Soviet nuclear attack . Though we reflexively disbelieved what the London government said, we heeded it .
 With the Cuban quarantine in effect, various four-minute plans were laid for getting laid and getting drunk were laid .
 I gave an impassioned speech denouncing President John F Kennedy for unwarranted aggression, and the day when I decided to study American history . That was the night I gave the speech . That night, he decided to read American history.
 Since 1962, we have learned more about the Cuban missile crisis . Events have taken place that have modified perceptions of it, perhaps helping to change or eradicate beliefs .
 The author of a previous book on the 1960s, he is aware of the need to place others’ perceptions, and thus his own, in a proper context, he says .
 Weisbrot is impeded in this task by the thus-far underdeveloped state of historiography on the crisis, writes . He writes: "History of the crisis has not yet been fully developed"
 No clear pattern of this type has hitherto been delineated regarding the missile crisis . Relatively speaking, no clear pattern has been established regarding this type of crisis .
 Historians instinctively gravitate to the view that linear progressions in historiography are simplistic . Perhaps its history is simplistic, but perhaps it's a good thing to say that .
 Even in the case of the Vietnam War, there is a case for standing back from the time-line approach . Gerald J DeGroot has indicated in a provocative essay on that conflict, its historiography may be intelligently discussed outside the framework of a temporal progression .
 Historians mastering more detail but within the framework of enduring assumptions . Mark J White observes that they are ‘descendants’ of those written by earlier generations of historians .
 chronology, wherever one can find it, is a useful compass to the great wilderness of opinion . Nevertheless chronology is useful, and chronology can be a useful guide to opinion, says historian .
 In the first chapter and in the epilogue of his book Weisbrot does chart a chronological progression, if with broad and tentative brush strokes . In the book, he charted a chronicle of his life in the first and last chapter .
 The first phase of writing took place in the 1960s, when authors basked in American triumphalism and portrayed President Kennedy as a Cold War hero for standing up to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev .
 Kennedy came to be portrayed, variously, as a compulsive risk-taker who thrived psychologically and politically on real or imagined crisis . Kennedy was portrayed as a person who felt his manhood was under challenge and had to respond with a display of chauvinist aggression .
 A third phase of writing in the 1980s reflected the new openness associated with the ending of the Cold War .
 A deluge of declassification caused JFK to be regarded with renewed sympathy . Light fell on his moderation in the face of Soviet provocation, and on the effective nature of his clandestine diplomacy .
 Weisbrot hints at an even more recent historiographical phase . Finally, he hints at a more recent historical phase .
 In the Hollywood movie Thirteen Days, the president and his attorney general brother Robert Kennedy appear, once again, as leaders of Arthurian stature . Perhaps, America once again feels the need for greatness in the White House .
 Weisbrot does not explicitly place himself within any of these schools of thought . He says he does not want to be associated with any school of thought in his work .
 In common with the first, third, and fourth phases of historical thinking but not with the revisionists, he admires President Kennedy . He admires JFK .
 In office, he had to strain to be a man of the people in order to win the support to enable him to operate effectively and to stand a chance of future success .
 He satisfied the hawks in order to secure the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba without risking a catastrophic nuclear war . The Cuban missile withdrawal was made without risking risking a catastrophe .
 Weisbrot sets himself the task of explaining how he did this and argues that it was a brilliant achievement . He argues that this is the best way to explain how he achieved it .
 The preceding chapters are a mise en scene, but they nevertheless form an essential backdrop to the author’s argument . The book is published in New York, New York .
 The Soviets’ launch of the Sputnik satellite in 1957 raised the specter of a missile-launched nuclear attack on the U.S. The U.K. was the target of a nuclear attack .
 Civil defense instructors taught children to hide under their desks to protect themselves from Nikita’s atom bombs . Their parents demanded tough-guy tactics from the White House .
 Weisbrot states that Kennedy was a reluctant Cold Warrior who only talked tough because he had to . Kennedy was reluctant Cold War leader who only spoke tough because of the need to .
 Kennedy’s campaign demands that America should stand up to Fidel Castro were controversial because the senator knew his adversary Vice President Richard Nixon did have plans to cut down the Cuban leader . Nixon could not admit this in public for national security reasons .
 JFK forced into retaliatory hyperbole by the rampantly blustering style of his Soviet counterpart . JFK was forced to respond to the bluster of his Russian counterpart .
 Khrushchev mocked the Monroe Doctrine and pronounced it “dead” He said it should best be buried “so that it should not poison the air by its decay” (p.m.t.v.d)
 Aficionados of American-Cuban relations will not be impressed by Weisbrot’s grasp of the historical background to the missile crisis . The missile crisis was a major U.S.-Cuban crisis .
 Weisbrot is right in saying that America propped up Castro’s predecessor Fulgencio Batista . But he does not mention that by the late 1950s, President Dwight D Eisenhower and his CIA director Allen Dulles were desperate to get rid of that appalling dictator
 Weisbrot's latest novel, The Last Friday at 8 p.m. ET, airs on PBS.com/Radio 4 at 8pm on Sunday .
 Rumors of missiles were rife of missiles in Cuba well before the materialization of photo-reconnaissance proof .
 When Kennedy showed a conciliatory face to Castro, respondents to a San Francisco Examiner poll punished him with a 62 percent negative rating . White House adviser Theodore Sorensen noted a point duly noted by White House .
 The Kennedys may not have been far from the mark in fearing impeachment . They may have been right to be impeached .
 When Kennedy imposed his blockade on Cuba, Gallup poll indicated 84 percent approval, with only 4 percent against . Only 4 percent were against the embargo .
 Kennedy responded to opinion and was a man of the people, Weisbrot says . Kennedy was known to be a strong voice of opinion, he says . He says he responded to the opinion of the public .
 In Chapter 6, Weisbrot maintains that the key to President Kennedy’s success lay in his handling of the problem of American missiles in Turkey .
 These intermediate range missiles were able to hit targets in the Soviet Union . They were meant to serve as a deterrent in the interval between bomber obsolescence and the anticipated deployment of intercontinental ballistic missiles .
 There was widespread concern in U.S. military and diplomatic circles that the missiles were obsolete, inaccurate and a gratuitous provocation to the Kremlin . However, there is widespread concern that they are obsolete and inaccurate .
 It would have been quite sensible to scrap them, but there were arguments against this . There were arguments that they should not have been scrapped .
 First, there was no need to surrender a bargaining chip without getting something in return . First, the government should get something out of its hands . The U.S. needs to get something from the U.K.
 Turkish government wanted missiles as a defense against possible Soviet attack . Some of America’s key European allies felt the same way . Turkey wanted the missiles .
 Third, the unilateral surrender would have fanned criticism within the United States. Third, it would have been a unilateral surrender to the Taliban.
 Moscow would withdraw missiles from Cuba, and Washington its missiles from Turkey . Moscow and Washington would withdraw their missiles from the U.S.
 Details of the deal would be kept secret at the time, preserving Kennedy’s image as the man of the people . However, the details of this deal were kept secret .
 A critique of Weisbrot’s book may be offered on two levels, that of argument and that of evidence . A critique is offered on the two levels: argument and the evidence .
 On the level of argument, any two people who lived through the crisis are likely to disagree, and here I offer just indicative examples of difference between the author’s views and mine .
 Weisbrot seems to accept at face value the idea that European leaders wanted American missiles in order to protect their countries .
 U.S. missiles actually put one’s country at risk by inviting a first-round demonstration of Soviet firepower . But, as those involved in the British Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament pointed out, the United States missile test was actually put at risk .
 The United States president telephones the Soviet premier, pronto, and works out, quite literally, a modus vivendi . The U.S. president telephoned the Soviet prime minister to discuss the situation .
 This is not the place to pursue the topic, but, given its author’s emphasis, Maximum Danger should have been . The author's emphasis on the topic is that it should be a good place to explore .
 Weisbrot has made some use of the Kennedy presidential library and of some of its microfiche derivatives . But his evidence on public opinion is of poor quality . Weis Brot has used some of the library library and some micro-fiche .
 There is nothing wrong in using secondary sources, but it is a pity that Weisbrot did not make more use of primary evidence, especially the White House press files . The book is based on Philip Nash's book on the Turkish missiles .
 Politicians don't like to admit that they react to public opinion, for fear of appearing weakly driven by it . Weisbrot does not try to address that concept . Politicians often don't want to appear to be weak-driven by public opinion .
 The paper trail to the president’s own desk is rarely strong, though it may be indicative . It may validly be inferred from the voluminous nature of the press files kept by every administration since Woodrow Wilson's that they do care .
 It may not be easy to divine what a given president thinks of opinion on an issue . How much weight he attaches to the press as distinct from polls, letters, congressmen, or demonstrations is not easily divined .
 Weisbrot’s agenda should make the effort, he says . Surely, however, an historian with an agenda should try to make an effort .
 It is quite possible that some evidence does exist, for Kennedy did sometimes record his reactions to public opinion . Kennedy did not record his reaction to the public opinion, for example .
 He said he respected the Women’s Strike for Peace march outside the White House in January 1962 . He later justified the nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union as an outcome of the parental values of WSP mothers .
 It is not clear what value or interpretation Weisbrot places on the relationship between presidential leadership and public opinion .
 Robert Weisbrot has raised an interesting question about domestic influences on Kennedy’s foreign policy .
 Weisbrot asks how the American people may have influenced presidential actions in the Cuban missile crisis . He asks if the U.S. people influenced the president's actions in Cuba .
 He has not supplied a convincing answer, but is to be commended for posing the question . It is not a good answer to the question.