 This study is based on the assumption that no crisis can be understood without considering also the forces and policies which preceded and which flowed from it . This study was based on an assumption that . no crisis . can be explained without considering the forces, policies which . preceded and . flowed from the
 The U.S. and Soviet strategic policies in the early 196os served to precipitate, the crisis . The crisis affected in turn the subsequent strategic policies of both sides and ultimately influenced the current strategic balance .
 Kennedy administration officials took office in the genuine belief that the United States might soon be placed in an unfavor* This article is based on a study of United States strategic arms policy being conducted by the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace and The Brookings Institution .
 The interpretations and conclusions presented here are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the staff, officers, or trustees of The Brookings Institution, the Carnegie Endowment .
 Intelligence estimates had been revised steadily during 1960 . The new administration could not dismiss the possibility that the Soviet Union had acquired an ICBM .
 This prospect endangered United States SAC bombers, then the cornerstone of U.S. strategic power . This prospect threatened to undermine the credibility of the United States deterrent . The prospect of bombing bombers was then a major threat to the U.K. military, author says .
 President Kennedy immediately acted to rectify the deficiencies as he perceived them of the U.S. deterrent posture . President Kennedy acted immediately .
 In his initial defense plan, the president accelerated the missile programs-tripling the rate of construction of Polaris submarines and doubling the production capacity of Minuteman rockets . The president also accelerated the program in his initial plan .
 The administration did not modify its strategic program after the myth was exposed . Later, when the missile-gap myth was officially exposed, the administration didn't modify its program .
 Despite Khrushchev's claims, by the early 196os, the Soviet Union had deployed only a handful of ICBMs . The United States faced a sizeable and growing U.S. strategic missile force .
 The Soviets realized that the U.S. was able to count and locate the Soviet small and ""soft"" missile force as well as their vulnerable bomber bases . The United States was not only able . to count but to locate the small and "soft" missile force .
 Kremlin leaders feared that the U.S. was moving toward a first-strike doctrine in the mid-t95os . The United States had a substantial counterforce capability which could endanger the Soviet deterrent .
 Public pronouncements of U.S. superiority added to Soviet concerns . Public pronouncement of United States superiority added a Soviet concern . The United States became a major factor in Soviet relations .
 Secretary of Defense McNamara articulated the ""no-cities"" doctrine in June 1962 which called for attacking only military targets in the event of nuclear war . Soviet fears that the United States actually planned to initiate a nuclear strike were further exacerbated .
 The dramatic reversal of the nuclear balance raised serious questions of policy for Moscow . Aside from real or perceived security risks, the reversal of nuclear balance raises serious questions for Russia .
 Kennedy' did not play brinksmanship in the style of John Foster Dulles . The stakes in Berlin were apparently thought to be high enough to warrant risking nuclear war .
 President Kennedy did not hesitate to bring the newly found strategic power of the United States to bear in an attempt to influence Soviet actions . Khrushchev's demands were rejected by Kennedy .
 The Berlin crisis coincided with official U.S. exposure of the nonexistent missile gap . Berlin crisis also coincided with the official United States exposure of a nonexistent gap .
 In fact, one reason for informing the Soviets that we knew their missile claims were false was the unsettled situation in Berlin . The situation was particularly timely and crucial for the U.S. to inform the Soviets .
 U.S. conventional capabilities in 1961 were grossly inadequate . Plans had been made to reverse Eisenhower's nuclear-oriented defense posture . The United States conventional capabilities were inadequate .
 President Kennedy had no choice but to protect ""vital"" Western interests by bringing the nuclear dimension into the picture . Therefore, President Kennedy was forced to act in order to protect his interests .
 President Kennedy had implied that the U.S. would be prepared to use nuclear weapons if necessary to defend Western Europe in general and Berlin in particular . The remark was no need to spell out the implications of this remark .
 In the midst of his Berlin speech, the president explicitly alluded to the ""possibilities of nuclear war"" and requested additional funds for civil defense; ibid., 536 .
 Soviet leaders feared that they might be unable to protect their vital interests in diplomatic dealings with the West . The strategic balance shifted against them, and they feared they might not be able to maintain their worldwide image .
 Planned improvements in U.S. nonnuclear capabilities threatened to deprive the Soviets of their longstanding superiority in conventional weapons . The Soviets were viewed as a partial counterweight to the United States nuclear advantage in the 1950s .
 Khrushchev clearly appreciated the danger posed by nuclear war and the limited utility of nuclear weapons . The world's first nuclear war was in the 1950s and '60s .
 It is possible, therefore, that the Soviets were prepared to settle for parity . It is also possible that they were prepared for parity with the Soviets .
 By mid-1962, the prospect of overwhelming U.S. military superiority gave the Soviets a strong political as well as military incentive to redress the balance of intercontinental strategic forces . The Soviets were wary of the United States military superiority .
 It was not enough to rely on their large medium-range missile and bomber capacity to threaten Western Europe, it is claimed . It is not enough for the U.S. to rely solely on its missile and aircraft .
 Long-range strategic missiles had become the most relevant measure of overall strength, the U.S. military says . Long range strategic missiles are now the most important measure of strength in the world .
 During the late 1950S, Khrushchev's Sputnik diplomacy had enhanced the value of these systems as political currency . Indeed, during the late . 1950S,. during the . 1950s, during . the . 50S, enhanced the . value of the . systems .
 The United States already had a considerable lead in ICBMs and SLBMs, in addition to its lead in long-range bombers . To attempt to overtake the United States in numbers of intercontinental systems, however, would entail a massive Soviet effort .
 Soviet technology of large ""soft"" and slow-reacting missiles would make a crash program especially costly, while yielding marginal security benefits . Furthermore, the existing Soviet technology would make it especially costly . A crash program would be especially costly and would yield marginal benefits .
 Khrushchev remained unwilling to commit his nation to an enormously expensive program which would detract from other needs . In any event, Khrushvic remained unwilling .
 It's reasonable to conjecture that the administration believed that emphasizing U.S. strategic superiority could exert a coercive effect on Moscow . The speech by Deputy Defense Secretary Gilpatric went beyond mere exposure of the missile gap .
 The Soviets had a foothold on this island and had been supplying Castro for some time with arms, including SAMs . The Soviets were supplying Castro with arms all types of all types, including those from Cuba .
 By installing mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles within range of the U.S., the Soviets could gain more quickly and at less cost many of the benefits of an ICBM construction .
 The large-scale deployment of MR/IRBMs against Western Europe suggested that these systems could be reliable and could be produced easily . The systems were deployed in Western Europe . The large scale deployment suggested these systems were reliable .
 The missiles would be vulnerable to nuclear and conventional strikes from the U.S., but their existence would complicate a United States attack . Clearly, the missiles would strengthen the Soviet deterrent, at least until a survivable intercontinental force became available .
 The primary motivation behind Khrushchev's decision to install missiles on Cuba was the Soviet's desire to rectify the strategic balance . The Soviet Union wanted to rapidly rectify its strategic balance in Cuba . The missile crisis was the first to take place in the Soviet-controlled Cuba .
 The Kennedy administration itself, from the initiation of the crisis, perceived this as a possible motive . Kennedy administration thought this was possible motive.
 Moscow made the decision to put missiles in Cuba in order to protect its interests . The decision was made by the Soviet Union in the 1980s and 1990s . The U.S. made a decision to move missiles into Cuba .
 For over a decade the Soviet Union had been ringed by U.S. SAC bases and, in the late 1950s, by missiles deployed in Turkey, Italy, and England .
 Soviet Union had never before stationed nuclear systems outside its borders . The Soviet Union never had a nuclear system stationed in the Soviet Union .
 Michel Tatu, Power in the Kremlin: From Khrushchev to Kosygin, 231; Hilsman, 201; Horelick and Rush, 141; Elie Abel, The Missile Crisis, 28. Elie .
 The unfavorable strategic balance had twice before prevented the Soviets from attaining any real degree of success in Berlin . The Soviets had twice failed to achieve success in the city .
 If the Soviets could succeed in Cuba, perhaps they might be able to launch a new and successful offensive against that city . The Soviets may have succeeded in Cuba .
 Kennedy administration felt strongly that a weak U.S. response to the Soviet provocation in Cuba would allow the Soviets to move on Berlin . Kennedy administration itself felt strongly .
 President Kennedy felt this to be the most immediate danger raised by the Cuban adventure, if not the dominant reason for Khrushchev's decision to install the missiles . Kennedy said this was the main reason for the installation of the missiles.
 President Kennedy made explicit references to possible Soviet moves against Berlin . Kennedy ordered final poreparations for the defense of Berlin during the naval blockade of the island .
 Many analysts argue that the Cuban undertaking can be attributed to politics within the Kremlin . Analysts say it is a political move by the Kremlin to get involved in the Cuban initiative .
 Khrushchev had been severely critized for his international policies and his overambition in exploiting the missile gap . Khrrushchev was severely critzed for his foreign policy and overambitions .
 By emplacing missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev perhaps hoped to repair his own prestige . By placing missiles on Cuba, the U.S. strategic power was diminished . By putting missiles there, he may have been trying to repair himself .
 A major Soviet offensive nuclear base in the Western Hemisphere might cast doubt on the willingness of the U.S. to defend its interests . It might also give the Soviets a greater foothold in Latin America, author says .
 Khrushchev hoped, by the Cuban gamble, to encourage potential Castros elsewhere in Latin America . The Cuban gamble was meant to encourage other Castros to follow suit .
 Horelick and Rush, 141; Schlesinger Jr., A Thousand Days: John F Kennedy in the White House, 796. Horerick andRush, 141. Schleissinger Jr. Jr. wrote the book, "A Thousand Days"
 The Bay of Pigs attempt to depose Castro also played a role in this objective . The bay of Pigs was also an attempt to oust Castro .
 Khrushchev claimed that the Bay of Pigs affair had forced him to emplace missiles on the island . In his first letter to the president, he said that the incident had made him emplaced missiles there . The incident occurred in 1962 .
 IR/MRBMs would contribute to deterring a U.S. attack on Cuba and generally help solidify the Soviet presence in Cuba . The introduction of IR/MIRBMs is a good idea to deter a United States attack .
 Castro would permit deployment and Soviet leaders could-and did-claim that the missiles were there for defense purposes . The world could not legitimately object to such a measure . In any event, Castro would allow deployment .
 Once the secret Soviet missile buildup was discovered, the next move was up to the U.S. A wealth of material has been written about the subsequent thirteen days .
 U.S. officials were concerned over the strictly strategic implications of Soviet missiles in Cuba . United States officials were clearly concerned over Soviet missile policy .
 It was difficult to ignore the fact that the Soviets had suddenly doubled their capacity to deliver nuclear warheads against the U.S. via ballistic missiles . The Soviets had doubled their capability to deliver nukes via missile delivery .
 This posed an increased threat to the United States population as well as to U.S. strategic forces, says President Obama . This posed a threat to America's population and its strategic forces . President Obama said the threat posed a 'increased threat'
 The fact that the missiles were at close range and could bypass the United States warning net presented a particular danger to the survivability of U.S. bombers . The missiles could bypass a U.N. warning net .
 The Soviet missiles did pose a new threat to Latin American cities, which had been considered beyond the effective range of Soviet ICBMs . Finally, the Soviet missile threat posed a new risk to Latin America .
 The president and his advisers knew that the Soviet deployment could not seriously endanger the United States . On the other hand, the U.S. knew that it could not be seriously harmed by the Soviet presence, the president said .
 Polaris submarines and ""hardened" ICBMs would remain secure, and countermeasures could be taken to minimize the danger to United States bombers . Polaris submarines would be secure . Countermeasures could also be taken .
 The Soviets already had the ability to deliver nu1 ear weapons against the U.S. with ICBMs, SLBMs and bombers .
 If the Soviets had increased their long-range missile force rather than emplaced shortrange missiles in Cuba, the effect would have been essentially the same . The Soviets would have increased their missile force if they had not .
 Administration officials were reacting to the possible adverse political consequences of the sudden visible increase in Soviet ""strategic power provided by having possibly hundreds of IR/MRBMs based in Cuba .
 Khrushchev might again adopt the policy of ""rocket rattling" which, as a minimum, could involve the United States in crises and weaken the Western alliance . More worrisome may have been the prospect that Khrushvic might again .
 Concern that the strategic balance might shift back toward the Soviet side does not in itself fully account for the administration's determination to remove the missiles . Nevertheless, as important as it might have been, the decision was made to remove them .
 What appears to have triggered the strong U.S. response, as much as any of the foregoing factors, was the way in which the Soviets went about redressing the balance, combined with the geographic and political uniqueness of Cuba, the author says .
 The administration considered Soviet deployment of offensive missiles in the Western Hemisphere to be a direct challenge to the U.S. Administration considered it a challenge to long-established policies .
 The Soviet government ignored President Kennedy's warning not to install offensive missiles in Cuba, while assuring the U.S. that it had every intention of complying, even going to the extreme .
 President Kennedy: Flagrant defiance of the U.S. and Soviet secrecy made a strong response imperative . President Kennedy and his advisers: "Flagrant defiance" of the United States made a response imperative.
 If the United States acquiesced under these circumstances-and with the issue of security against nuclear attack at stake-administration officials feared that U.S. prestige and credibility would be impaired . Administration feared that United States prestige would be affected by this .
 If the Soviets were allowed to succeed in this move, the U.S. was likely to face serious problems around the-world, in Europe, and, most notably, in Berlin .
 The president made a special point of warning Khrushchev not to underestimate the American determination and will, as if to avoid projecting an image of weakness, he said .
 If the Soviets had increased their ICBM forces rapidly or even stationed short-range missiles in Eastern Europe as part of a declared policy, the administration would have been less upset . The administration was less able to take feasible actions to eliminate the buildup, he says .
 President refused to accept suggestions made early in the crisis that the U.S. offer to ""trade"" its IRBMs- still based in Turkey and Italy- despite an earlier decision to have them removed as a quid pro quo for Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba .
 Administration applied the principles of ""flexible response,"" starting with a ""mounting sequence of threats" short of nuclear war . Essentially, the administration applied the . principles of "flexible responses"
 All of the military options discussed by Ex Commn were nonnuclear-naval blockade, conventional air strike against the sites, and invasion-as might have been anticipated .
 Kennedy administration officials advocated this approach as the most effective way to manage crises . JFK administration officials had attempted to follow this course in Berlin .
 Even though it was recognized that United States MRBMs were strategically useless and their removal would represent ""no loss"" to the United States or its allies, the president apparently feared that such an arrangement would both legitimize the Soviet action and display weakness . The president also believed that attempts to
 The U.S. would run a greater risk in the event military action against Cuba were later required, and the Soviets would be in a stronger bargaining position . In such a circumstance, the U.K. would be at greater risk .
 Robert Kennedy rejected formal trade and refused to negotiate under "threat or pressure" The president later informed the Soviets that our missiles would be removed once the Soviets removed their missiles .
 Despite overwhelming U.S. nuclear superiority, President Kennedy knew that nuclear war would be catastrophic . Despite overwhelming United States nuclear superiority . President Kennedy known that a nuclear war against the United States was catastrophic .
 If the Soviets launched first, their relatively small ICBM and SLBM forces combined with their long-range bomber force would have been able to cause tens of, millions of U.S. fatalities .
 There was no guarantee that the entire Soviet force would be destroyed on the ground or that the USSR would not fire some of its missiles on warning . The United States could have launched first and destroyed an appreciable part of Soviet strategic power .
 An enormous force of Soviet medium-range missiles and bombers held Western Europe hostage . Moreover, a huge force of . Soviet medium . range missiles and . bombers were held hostage by Western Europe .
 Even a few nudear weapons landing on U.S. or European cities would be incredibly destructive . Even a small bomb could be devastating for the United States or Europe .
 The president rejected the idea that the U.S. be the first to use nuclear weapons . He avoided overt nuclear threats and avoided overt threats .
 As an immediate response to the Cuban crisis, the U.S. had readied massive conventional power in addition to calling for a general strategic alert . Presi18 Presi was also readied by the United States as a possible solution to the crisis .
 These forces could support the blockade and provide for the air strike and invasion contingencies . The U.S. could also provide support for an air strike or invasion contingency .
 A large U.S. naval presence was established in the area . Tactical aircraft wings were deployed within range of Cuba, and reserve forces increased .
 President Kennedy did not have to remind the Soviets that a nuclear attack against the U.S. would bring a retaliatory response . A nuclear attack on the United States-whether launched from Cuba or the USSR-would bring a retaliation .
 President Kennedy was concerned that events might go out of control and ultimately lead to nuclear war . Kennedy was worried events might lead to a nuclear war, but he was not concerned .
 The president kept U.S. actions tightly under control and tried to avoid decisions which would push the crisis past the point of no return .
 The president was convinced that the Soviet Union also wanted to avoid nuclear war over Cuba . Khrushchev was concerned that, if care were not taken, Khrrushchev might be forced into an ""irrational"" nuclear response .
 Kennedy sought to give Khrushchev room to maneuver and find a graceful way to withdraw, rejecting actions which might push the Soviets into a corner . Kennedy therefore sought to find a way to deal with the Soviets .
 Diplomatic avenues were pursued in parallel-in the UN, with the OAS, and directly with the Soviet government . While bringing military pressure to bear, through such means as intensifying aerial overflights, was avoided .
 The president's critical decision to impose a blockade, rather than launch an air strike or an invasion, was typical of his approach . The blockade was the first serious U.S. move to impose an international blockade of Syria .
 Once the blockade was institerrent policy also applied to Soviet nuclear attacks against any nation in the Western Hemisphere . Once the policy was institrent policy, it applied to any nuclear attack against any Western Hemisphere.
 In fact, explicitly placing the U.S. strategic umbrella over all nations in the Western Hemisphere was not a radical departure from overall policies, given the precedent of United States commitment to Europe and Japan . The United States has a long history of supporting European and Japanese governments .
 A blockade would signal U.S. seriousness, give the Soviets time to deliberate, preserve future U.K. options, and minimize the likelihood and consequences of armed conflict .
 Even the term quailrantine was selected in part because it sounded less belliger-ent than blockade . The term was chosen because it sounds less like blockade than blockade.
 Later in the crisis, even after the downing American reconnaissance plane over Cuba, the pre still rejected military recommendations for an air strike, re to attack and expressing the desire to find less risky alternatives .
 Kennedy seemed prepared to take actions which may well have had this result . Yet, despite all the cautious behavior to avoid nuclear war, to ensure removal of the missiles, Kennedy seemed to take action which may have led to this result.
 U.S. officials recognized that an air strike, alone or followved by an invasion, would increase the risk of nuclear war . Air strike alone or followedved by invasion would increase nuclear war risk .
 The Soviets might retaliate from Cuba with surviving missiles, undertake reciprocal action against U.S. missiles in Turkey, or launch a major move against Berlin . The Soviets may have survived missiles from Cuba .
 Secretary McNamara proposed that depth charges be used to force the submarine to surface . McNamara: Depth charges should be used as a means to force a submarine to sub surface .
 President Kennedy saw the danger of an exchange with a Soviet submarine, but agreed that there was no other choice . President Kennedy agreed to exchange with the Soviet submarine .
 In the president's judgment, the U.S. had to run the risk of triggering a series of escalating moves and enforcing the quarantine, he says . The president's decision to quarantine the region was a mistake .
 Later in the crisis, when it became clear that the blockade was not going to prevent the Soviets from completing work on the missiles already present, the president was willing to consider seriously an air strike and to convey this threat to the Soviets .
 Khrushchev offered to withdraw missiles in exchange for U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba . U.K. agreed to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States pledge to stay out of Cuba . The decision was made on October 2, 1962 .
 U.S. overflights indicated that the missile sites would soon be operational . The missile sites are expected to be operational soon . United States overflights indicate that the sites would be operational.
 Khrushchev asked for a U.S. promise not to invade Cuba, letter shows . The earlier letter, asking for a United States promise not invading Cuba, was clearly from Khrrushchev . Khrushchev's letter was sent to the White House in 1961 .
 The later letter was apparently prepared by the Soviet Foreign Ministry . It demanded that the American bases in Turkey be removed as a quid pro quo for the Soviet bases in Cuba .
 The U.S. threatened to remove the missiles if the Soviets did not . The message was a threat of punishment for noncompliance, the authors say .
 A case can be made that U.S. nuclear superiority played an important role in generally strengthening the administration's resolve . As the crisis progressed, the administration took actions which ran an appreciable risk of leading to nuclear war .
 The president made no direct threats to use nuclear weapons or specific references to U.S. strategic advantage . He may well have concluded that United States nuclear power would have a restraining and possibly coercive effect on the behavior of Soviet leaders .
 President Kennedy apparently believed that U.S. strategic superiority would reliably deter the Soviets from initiating a nuclear war . President Kennedy believed that the United States would prevent nuclear war with the Soviets .
 President Kennedy seemed to believe that United States nuclear superiority, when coupled with United States conventional superiority, would compel Khrushchev to withdraw the missiles . At the same time, President Kennedy believed that the U.S. would withdraw the missile . The missiles were launched in the early 1960s
 U.S. would be in a better position than the Soviets to limit damage through counterforce attack . Perhaps the president was somewhat more willing to contemplate risking a nuclear exchange .
 The U.S. acted with determination in forcing the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba . It is clear that the United States acted with determined determination .
 The ultimate outcome of the crisis hinged upon the Soviet Union's perceptions and the motives which influenced Kremlin leaders to eventually agree to U.S. demands .
 It seems clear that the Soviets were frightened by the prospect of a nuclear war over Cuba . Despite their public stance, however, it seems clear they were frightened .
 Kremlin leaders were aware that a nuclear conflict would be catastrophic for the Soviet Union and the world . In the early 196os, Kremlin leaders knew a nuclear war would be disastrous for the world.
 During the crisis, Khrushchev continually pointed to the danger of nuclear war . During the 1950s and 1960s, the Soviet Union was in full control of the nuclear weapons program .
 Soviet leaders were extremely wary of pressing their policies to the point that use of nuclear weapons seemed inevitable . As a result of Soviet leaders being wary of pressing their policies, they were wary of using nuclear weapons .
 The Soviet strategic position during the crisis was highly unfavorable-as noted, this was perhaps the single most important motive for the decision to put missiles into Cuba . The Soviet position in Cuba was very unfavorable .
 Khrushchev admitted that Soviet missiles were indeed in Cuba and threatened to use them if necessary . Later, in a personal conversation with a private U.S. citizen, he admitted that the missiles were in Cuba .
 The Soviets continued to take a hard line as they maintained their speedup on completion of the MR/IRBMs . Even after Kennedy's strong speech of October 22, the Soviets continued their hard line .
 In point of fact, these bombers were not removed from Cuba until November 20 . The bombers were taken from Cuba on November 20.
 Contrary to U.S. fears, the Soviets did not move against Berlin during the course of the Cuban crisis . Contrary to United States fears, Berlin was not invaded by the Soviets .
 Despite Khrushchev's threat to defy the U.S. blockade at the risk of war, he did not do so when faced with the actual choice . Despite the threat, he didn't defy the United States blockade, he says .
 Khrushchev feared that a U.S. air strike or invasion against Cuba would bring both sides dangerously close to the brink . The Cuban government feared an air strike and invasion would bring the two countries dangerously close .
 Khrushchev could have stood firm and refused to remove the missiles on the assumption that the U.S. would back down rather than risk nuclear war . He could have left the missiles in the hope that the United States wouldn't back down, he says .
 It is interesting to contemplate the outcome of the Cuban crisis if Khrushchev had indeed decided to carry the game of 'nuclear chicken' further . The game of "nuclear chicken" may have led to the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 From the Kremlin's vantage point, the possibility that the U.S. could do so could not be ruled out . Even though United States calculations demonstrated the difficulty of mounting a . successful counterforce attack against the Soviets, from the Kremlin . The possibility of a successful counter force attack against
 A nuclear exchange would have resulted in considerably greater damage to the Soviet Union than to the U.S., and the Soviets had neither the forces nor the doctrine which would have enabled them to play by the rules of ""limited"" strategic war .
 The strategic balance seen through Soviet eyes probably placed Kremlin leaders at a psychological disadvantage41 and lent credence to U.S. threats4141 .
 U.S. leaders would be less likely to compromise and more prone to take conventional military action on the assumption that the Soviets would be reluctant to respond with a nuclear strike . Buttressed by a real and acknowledged edge in nuclear weapons, U.K. leaders are more likely to take
 President Kennedy's statement of October 22, in which he referred to the United States ""full retaliatory response"" policy was clearly a reminder of United States power and may have been taken as a threat to launch a preemptive attack against the Soviet Union if it did not comply .
 U.S. strategic superiority, however, was obviously not the only factor influencing Soviet behavior . United States strategic superiority was not only the reason for Soviet behavior, it was also a factor .
 The overwhelming United States conventional superiority in the area added to Khrushchev's apprehensions . The overwhelming U.S. conventional superiority contributed greatly to the Soviet decision .
 If some of the approximately seventy missiles stationed in Cuba had become operational, the Soviet position would have been improved . However, the extreme vulnerability of these weapons would have made this contribution marginal . Indeed, it was apparently the combination of United States con40 .
 He states that it is logical to assume that since the Soviets felt the strategic balance to be a factor when they put the missiles in Cuba, they were aware of U.S. superiority during the crisis .
 The United States did not have sufficient numerical and vulnerability advantages over the Soviet Union to prevent real damage from being done to the U.S., from the Soviet viewpoint, their own forces were too limited . The Soviet Union felt the United States had too much of a numerical advantage over them .
 United States nuclear and conventional forces served to complement each other . U.S. nuclear forces were used in the Cold War .
 While American nuclear power neutralized Soviet nuclear power, U.S. conventional superiority discouraged the Soviets from a conventional confrontation .
 The Soviets could not, without the use of nuclear weapons, prevent the U.S. from invading Cuba or destroying the missile sites with conventional air attacks . The Soviets were unable to prevent the United States from invading or destroying missile sites .
 At the same time, United States strategic power more than negated Soviet strategic capabilities, making the use of nuclear weapons irrational and heightening the risks of a U.S.-Soviet military conflict over Cuba .
 In the end, he was not prepared to run a serious risk of nuclear war over the missiles in Cuba . "In the end of the year, he did not want to risk nuclear war"
 Khrushchev made some policy gains and avoided further embarassment . The U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba and the eleventh-hour offer to remove missiles in Turkey were among the reasons for the U.K. decision .
 U.S. military power was the prime influence behind Khrushchev's decision . The prime influence was the United States military power, says historian .
 McNamara: "Khrushchev knew that he faced the full military power of the U.S., including its nuclear weapons" "That is the reason, and the only reason, why he withdrew those weapons.""
 To remove missiles without Soviet agreement would have required a United States air strike which could have had nuclear repercussions . To remove the missiles would have needed Soviet agreement .
 Moscow's-missile gambit pressed this nation to the point where, rightly or wrongly, the next steps were liable to lead inevitably to global war . From another point of view, however, it can be argued that Moscow's gambit was pressed .
 Many observers-and almost all of the participants in the U.S. government-argue that the president exhibited great restraint in his efforts to obtain removal of the missiles . Many observers say that Obama showed great restraint .
 Khrushchev's display of sensitivity to the danger of nuclear war as well as the masterful way in which, in order to avoid military clashes, he gave him room to maneuver . They emphasize his use of ""graduated responses"" and his display of sensitivity to the
 Others claim that the president acted irresponsibly by bringing the world too close to nuclear war . Others say that the world has come dangerously close to war .
 Had the U.S. decided to invade, the consequences would have been serious, he says .
 Some commentators have claimed that the president was strongly influenced by domestic politics . Some commentators claim that President Obama has been influenced by foreign policy .
 The Republicans had already begun to use the buildup of Soviet arms in Cuba as an election issue . The president finally took a strong public position warning the USSR that he would not tolerate the introduction of ""offensive"" weapons because of the political risk .
 Other critics feel that because of the Berlin situation and the abortive Bay of Pigs incident, the president personally felt the need to adopt a' strong position against Khrushchev-at all costs .
 He contended that Kennedy made a grandstand play by delivering his ultimatum to Khrushchev on television rather than privately to Gromyko . Kennedy's motives were at least partly political, he said . He said Kennedy's actions were a grand stand play .
 The Russian withdrawal had to be complete, unilateral, and secured by the end of October""; Steel, ""The Kennedys and the Missile Crisis,"" 15-i6. Steel .
 Kennedy was being pressured by hardliners from the military, the State Department, and the CIA, Hilsman says . Hilman rebutted that Kennedy was pressured by both Republicans and Democrats in Congress .
 The foreign policy consequences of a rapid increase in Soviet nuclear power could have raised serious security problems for the West . The way the USSR ignored previous warnings and acted with deceit could have led to other crises .
 The presence of a large number of ""soft"" Soviet missiles in Cuba would have introduced seriQus instabilities in the strategic balance . Moreover, it could also be argued that the presence of  "soft" Soviet missiles would have brought instability to Cuba .
 In a time of tension, the high vulnerability of these systems to a United States counterforce attack would have greatly increased the ""reciprocal fear of surprise attack"" and possibly resulted in an unwarranted launch by the USSR of a preemptive strike .
 U.S. actions to remove missiles might have led to nuclear war, author says . "The risks must be weighed," he says .
 Since the predictions of the potential nuclear risk were quite uncertain, the U.S. did not have to overreact . The predictions are quite uncertain and the United States didn't have to react .
 Chances are that agreement could have been reached before the missiles were fully operational . But even if this were not, the United States would still have been in a position to force them to be withdrawn .
 Khrushchev had perceived Kennedy's reluctance to wage war over Berlin as a loss of nerve . In any event, if successful, whatever loss that might have been associated with this U.S. ""concession"" would have been far outweighed by the loss of the war, writes
 Kennedy felt some day he might have to run the ""supreme risk"" in order to convince Khrushchev of his strength . Kennedy felt that the time had arrived when Cuba occurred, Kennedy said .
 He believes Kennedy felt personally inferior because of Berlin and the Bay of Pigs . He believes that Kennedy felt inferior .
 Kennedy was determined, on a purely personal level, to stand "eyeball to eyeball" with Khrushchev . Therefore, he was determined to stand 'eyeeball' to meet with Khruschev . Kennedy was also determined to meet Khruschchev on a
 Kennedy refused to ""trade"" the Turkish missiles for the Cuban missiles . Stone feel that politics was a dominant motive in Kennedy's refusal to trade the missiles for Cuban missiles.
 Stone feels that the U.S. risked World War Three, which could have been avoided by negotiations . Stone says the United States risked a World War III, which was avoided by talks .
 The White House was disturbed by the Turkish issue because of its fairness, Steel says . Steel claims the issue was fair because it was fair .
 If the administration accepted the trade, they feared accusations of weakness from the Republicans; . However, if they accepted the deal, they would be accused of weakness .
 Cuban episode has been the source of speculation on the general problem of the relationship of the strategic balance to the management and outcome of crises .
 U.S. decisions throughout the crisis were strongly influenced by the overwhelming United States conventional superiority . The United States was dominant in the Soviet Union in the early 1980s .
 Other characteristics unique to the Cuban crisis gave momentum to the United States, undermining the Soviet position . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were weakened by the Cuban situation .
 United States interests were apparently more dominant than Soviet interests . The United States was in a strong diplomatic position as a result of the USSR's deceitful and clandestine behavior .
 We might hypothetically ask whether the management or outcome of the crisis would have been different if the strategic balance had been reversed to favor the USSR . Or, more plausibly, had reflected a situation of nuclear parity .
 In this circumstance, United States nuclear power would still have been sufficient to cancel Soviet nuclear capabilities . U.S. nuclear power still would have been enough to cancel the Soviet nuclear capability .
 U.S. conventional superiority would have given the United States an advantage . The United States would have had a greater advantage in conventional warfare .
 It is doubtful that the U.S. would have allowed the USSR to station missiles in Cuba or that the Soviets would have run a nuclear risk and refused to comply .
 President Kennedy would have been less likely to contemplate and threaten actions which ran a nuclear risk, such as an air strike, than to seek a negotiated solution . Kennedy might have concluded that his bluff might be called, perhaps because he concluded that he might be bluffed .
 We may also question the outcome of a situation in which the U.S. lacked conventional superiority . The United States may not have a conventional superiority, the author says .
 As Kennedy did in the Berlin crisis of 1961, the U.S. might then have looked to its strategic forces as the prime security tool .
 In that case, United States nuclear advantage would have seemed important . U.S. nuclear advantage seemed important in that case .
 This led to a period of detente and rapid progress in reaching agreement on the limited test ban and other arms control measures . It led to an agreement on an arms control agreement and other measures .
 Both nations have tended to avoid engaging each other in serious situations which might risk nuclear war . Even more significantly, since that time, both nations have not engaged in serious nuclear war.
 U.S.-Soviet strategic arms race was not altogether desirable . The Cuban crisis had a negative impact on the U.K.-Soviet arms race . The crisis was the result of a U.N. effort to counterbalance the Soviet-U.S. arms race.
 The failure in Cuba demonstrated once more the futility of Khrushchev's policy of attempting to intimidate the United States with strategic threats . The failure dramatized for Kremlin leaders the dangers associated with nuclear-related crises . U.S. superiority still remained .
 Cuban setback confirmed Soviet interest in redressing the strategic balance . The Cuban setback not only confirmed but reinforced Soviet interest . The U.S. was determined to redistress the situation in Cuba .
 Soviet leaders believed that nuclear superiority enabled the U.S. to practice ""coercive diplomacy"" in Cuba and to force Khrushchev to retreat . Soviet leaders thought that nuclear supremacy enabled the United States to use its nuclear superiority in Cuba . The United States was able to use nuclear
 Ironically, this United States ""victory"" vindicated Moscow's view that strategic power conferred political importance . Ironically, the U.S. 'victory' vindicated Russia's view of strategic power, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Moscow apparently felt it did not have sufficient nuclear power to deal diplomatically with the West . Moscow apparently wanted to maintain its position as a world power . Moscow felt it didn't have enough nuclear power .
 Khrushchev could not avoid drawing the conclusion that the balance must be corrected in a legitimate and straightforward way . The balance must now be corrected, he said .
 Khrushchev still refused to undertake the massive and expensive missile deployment program . The missile program was still being advocated by many leaders in the Kremlin .
 In the long run, he saw a gradual buildup of Soviet strategic strength aiming toward parity or perhaps even superiority . The Soviet Union's strategic strength was seen to be reaching parity or even superiority, he said .
 For the immediate future, Khrushchev turned once again to diplomacy to provide a substitute for weaponry- only this time, the course was one of restraint, not rocket-rattling .
 Khrushchev was genuinely interested in finding ways to reduce the risk of war and to control nuclear arms . The Soviet leader's post-Cuban policy of detente was designed to buy time for Soviet missile deployments while slowing down United States programs .
 After Khrushchev's departure, the Soviets finally launched a major effort to redress the balance . The Soviet Union finally launched an effort to reverse the balance of power in Russia .
 The new Kremlin leaders were more motivated than Khrushchev to accomplish this objective . They were willing to allocate the resources necessary for this purpose and improve Soviet defenses .
 Khrushchev's decision to postpone major missile construction and his general unwillingness to increase military spending-along with his Cuban misadventure- were among the key factors which contributed to his downfall .
 In early 1965, Brezhnev and Kosygin, drawing upon the R & D programs initiated under Khrushchev, decided to upgrade sub . Among the writers who corroborate this theory are Horelick and Rush .
 The decision was made to deploy the SS-9 and SS-ui ICBMs and acquire a Polaris-type missile-launching submarine system . At that time, the decision was . made to . acquire a . Polaris type missile-launch submarine system.
 Construction of the Moscow ABM system was continued, but this defensive program was only partially completed as increased priority was placed on offensive missiles . Construction was continued in Moscow, but the ABM program was not completed .
 By 1968, the Soviets were approaching parity in, numbers of ""hardened" ICBMs and had begun to deploy Polaris-type submarines . The Soviets were nearing parity in the numbers of, 'hardened' ICB Ms. and "hardened'" submarines .
 As the USSR began to close the gap, the U.S. took counteractions to maintain its position of strength . The United States began to take counteractions against the Soviet Union .
 In 1965, decisions were made to procure the advanced Minuteman III and Poseidon missiles which carried multiple warheads or MIRVs . The missiles were made in 1965 to carry multiple warheads and carry multiple MIRV warheads .
 These programs were pursued primarily as a means of maintaining U.S. deterrent capability in the event the Soviets mounted a massive ABM effort . MIRVs were also considered as means of ensuring U.K. superiority in numbers of nuclear warheads and damage-inflicting potential would remain
 In 1967, the United States decided to deploy the ""thin"" Sentinel ABM system as a counter to the potential Chinese ICBM threat . On the defensive side, the U.S. deployed the system in 1967 .
 The system also had anti-Soviet capabilities and provided a base for expansion to a large ABM network . But this system also provided an anti-Russian capabilities .
 The Soviets built a substantially larger strategic force during the years 1966 to 1969 than U.S. estimates had predicted . As it turned out, the Soviets built substantially larger . larger strategic forces .
 Soviet decisions to sustain their offensive program past parity in ICBMs and to develop multiple warheads stemmed from a variety of internal bureaucratic factors, including a desire to seek a counterforce first-strike capacity .
 An equally plausible explanation centers around the perceived Soviet need to maintain a credible deterrent, the author says . The U.S. may have been trying to protect itself from Soviet aggression, he says .
 It is difficult to reconstruct the details of Soviet decisionmaking during this period, and, in particular, to assign responsibility for specific strategic-armsprogram decisions to either Khrushchev or his successors .
 The U.S. daims of superiority in warheads added political pressure to the Soviets . And, as they had in the early 196os, they had also daimed .
 The increasing risks and costs of the strategic arms competition in the late 1960s gave the U.S. incentive to attempt to initiate strategic arms limitation talks . The increasing costs and risks of the arms competition gave the United States incentive to start talks .
 The Soviet Union refused to enter into negotiations until it had attained a position of parity - not merely in terms of military capabilities but also in . terms of the more political indices of numbers of missiles .
 Progress in other arms control areas during the 196os was not matched by progress in curtailing the strategic arms race . The 196os did not achieve a significant increase in arms control efforts .
 Moscow agreements signed in May 1972 placed only minimal constraints on -offensive weapons . By the time the so called SALT talks began in November 1969, many possibilities for effective strategic arms control had been foreclosed .
 The Kennedy administration's early emphasis on superiority can be said to have helped cause the Cuban crisis by tilting the nuclear balance so far against the Soviets that they were ""forced"" to emplace missiles in Cuba in order to rectify the strategic relationship with the Soviets . Policy Implications
 Had the U.S. been more sensitive to the Soviet need -both political and military-for equality, it might have not pressed its advantage as far as it did, and, consequently, might have avoided the risks .
 The interim agreement limits the number of ICBMs and SLBMs to those currently operational and under construction . It does not control multiple warheads or bombers, or medium-range nuclear delivery systems .
 For a complete description of the offensive and defensive accords, see The ABM Treaty and the Interim Agreement, Message from the President of the United States, 92nd Cong., 2nd Sess., June 1972 .
 This perhaps indicates U.S. insensitivity to the Soviet dilemma which, as indicated, the United States helped precipitate . The United States also helped to precipitate the collapse of the Soviet Union .
 While the Cuban crisis underscored the danger of nuclear confrontations, the U.S. should also have learned that mutual stability, rather than a stress on unilateral superiority, should be the primary strategic policy objective of the United States. Mutual stability, not unilateral superiority .
 Although the United States can no longer boast of strategic superiority, parity may not prove to be stabilizing in itself . The U.S. may not be able to rely on parity as well as other factors .
 It will take a deliberate effort on the part of both sides to maintain a situation of actual and perceived mutual stability . With the potential of new weapons technologies, it will take the .
 parity will not automatically prohibit nations from turning once again to nuclear threats to obtain foreign policy objectives . Similarly, the presence of parity won't automatically prohibit countries from turning to nukes to achieve objectives .
 If there is one overall lesson to be learned from the Cuban crisis, it is that U.S. policy makers must take into account not only the effect of their policies on the other side at any given time, but the overall and long-term consequences for global stability .