 Aspects of international relations and Russia, 1905–1941 General Certificate of Secondary Education Mark Scheme for June 2017 . Oxford Cambridge and RSA Examinations OCR is a leading UK awarding body .
 OCR qualifications include AS/A Levels, Diplomas, GCSEs, Cambridge Nationals, Cambridge Technicals, Functional Skills, Key Skills, Entry Level qualifications, NVQs and vocational qualifications in areas such as IT, business, languages, teaching/training and administration .
 It is also responsible for developing new specifications to meet national requirements and the needs of students and teachers .
 OCR is a not-for-profit organisation; any surplus made is invested back into the establishment to help towards the development of qualifications and support .
 This mark scheme is published as an aid to teachers and students, to indicate the requirements of the examination . The mark scheme has been published as a mark scheme to indicate requirements .
 It does not indicate the details of the discussions which took place at an examiners’ meeting before marking commenced .
 All examiners are instructed that alternative correct answers and unexpected approaches in candidates’ scripts must be given marks that fairly reflect the relevant knowledge and skills demonstrated . Alternative correct answers are given marks based on relevant knowledge, skills demonstrated, says examiners .
 Mark schemes should be read in conjunction with the published question papers and the report on the examination . Mark schemes can be used to help students understand how to read the question papers .
 OCR will not enter into any discussion or correspondence in connection with this mark scheme . OCR has no obligation to enter into discussions with the company .
 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance, the cartoon and your knowledge to explain your demonstrating evidence of all three AOs . Use details of 7 to show your knowledge of the AOs and the cartoon .
 They interpret the cartoon, by explaining the could have caused a nuclear war . Kennedy by reacting with aggression to the cartoonist’s main message and produce a sound response in USSR placing missiles on Cuba, and Khrushchev by forcing his way through context the United States naval blockade .
 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding and exhausted by the effort of ‘shutting war down’ in the cartoon which of the period . They seem relieved .
 Cartoonists try to negotiate by letter cartoon's main message and produce a sound response in and even using the President’s brother . They interpret the cartoon by explaining the highlights at the last minute .
 Cartoon cartoon shows some approval and optimism that the future will be less dangerous . Cartoon also shows optimism that future will become less dangerous, but also hopeful .
 Both leaders are shown working together and agreeing that Level 3 3-4 together they must prevent war in the future by finding ‘a lock’ for the chest .
 Cartoon was produced only a month after the crisis ended the cartoonist is aware that of the period . As Candidates demonstrate some knowledge of understanding it was produced as well as the candidates .
 They interpret a valid sub–message of the both sides made concessions and agreements to prevent war breaking out, cartoon and produce a response in context . and he clearly believes this air of cooperation will continue .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev have worked together to prevent nuclear war in the CMC . Or Kennedy and KHrushchev risked nuclear war . Or JFK and Khruschev risked a nuclear war. Or Kennedy risked a war .
 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain why the 6-8 changes Castro was making in Cuba . Candidates demonstrated sound knowledge of why the changes were being made .
 When he seized power from Batista he USA took action against Cuba in the years 1959 to 1961 . Cuba was taken into account by the U.S. in 1959 and 1961 .
 They nationalised US-owned agricultural businesses and gave away their land to produce a multi-causal response . The response was a response that demonstrates thorough his peasant supporters .
 Cuba banned sugar imports from Cuba in response to US opposition to Castro . Cuba's economic survival was vital to Cuba’s economic survival . This created powerful opposition .
 Castro nationalised US-owned oil refineries without compensation . US Level 2 responded with a full scale trade ban . The whole situation escalated .
 The USA wanted to disrupt Cuba’s Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-5 trade to weaken its economy and weaken its hold on power, to explain why the USA took action against Cuba in the years which they saw as dangerous to its own economic and political interests .
 Another reason they took action was that they were concerned about the 1-2 developing relationship between Khrushchev and Castro . Another reason is that they wanted to prevent the 1,2 developing relationships between Khruschev and Fidel Castro .
 When he first came Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of U.S. action to power . It was not clear that Castro was a communist, however by the against Cuba in the years 1959 to 1961 he had allied Cuba with the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba in January 1961 . The Cold War was hotting up, and any advance of communism could damage the USA . Kennedy: "No response or no response worthy of credit. No response"
 He gave the go-ahead for the Bay of Pigs invasion with Cuban exiles in an attempt to remove Castro from power . He also gave the green light for the invasion of Cuba .
 One reason was that Berlin was deep in the heart of Soviet controlled East . Stalin resented that a large part of it was being run by the 1945 and 1949 .
 Stalin disagreed with the West’s ideology of democracy and free-market features of the period . He did not want people in his zone to be attracted by the fruits of capitalist system . Stalin disagreed .
 Candidates demonstrate knowledge and understanding reparations for war . of why Berlin was a cause of tension between 1945 and 1949 . It would also make his own exploitation of East Germany Level 2 3-4 more evident .
 Level 1 Stalin prevented the Allies accessing West Berlin by land and sea in 1948 . In retaliation to the West unifying its zones and reforming the currency in 1948, Stalin stopped the Allies access West Berlin .
 Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about Berlin 1-2 off all roads, canals and railways forcing the Allies to come up with a plan to . resource their 2 million people . The Allies had to . come up . with a . plan to between 1945 and 1949 resource their . 2
 One Level 0 aggressive move could have resulted in military conflict . They did, the Berlin Airlift, but the blockade massively raised tension between the two sides .
 Cold War tensions in Europe before 1950: demonstrating evidence AOs 1 and 2 . This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance .
 The USSR increased Cold War tensions by expanding the Truman doctrine and Marshall Aid . Truman doctrine expanded Marshall Aid and expanded the Marshall Doctrine .
 Stalin had been allowed a ‘sphere of influence’ in Europe according to the Yalta conference . He was determined to surround the USSR with ‘friendly’ countries .
 From 1945 to 1948 he made his answer referring only to and . . sure that these countries were run by communists . Explain as countries that were under his influence, and from 1945-48 he made your answer refer only to . and . only to countries that he said were under communist influence
 At times communists seem to have won elections honestly, at other times they gained power with the helping hand of the Red Army and underhand methods . At times they seem to win elections honestly and at times they gain power with underhand tactics .
 The West was shocked and alarmed that eastern Europe should fall so Level 5 Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and completely under Stalin’s influence, which is what motivated their actions .
 Stalin’s desire for control and security frightened the explain how far they agree . Stalin's desire for security and control frightened the Soviet Union . Stalin wanted to control and secure the country .
 Truman doctrine and Marshall Aid provoked Stalin . Truman doctrine provoked Stalin, but the USA did not have to respond in the way it did . They produce a fully developed USA and increased tension massively .
 In 1947 President Truman announced that the USA would help any country at risk of a communist takeover . To justify a valid U.S. policy, Truman said that the U.K. would support any country in danger of being taken over .
 Truman doctrine was the start of the U.S. policy of containment . This was the Truman doctrine and was the beginning of the United States policy .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation are accurate . Written work raised tensions with the USSR who saw it as a direct threat to the country .
 Meaning is communicated very clearly. attack on their ideology and threat to their security . Attack on ideology and security is attack on ideology, threat to security, says author .
 The Americans funded the monarchists in Greece . Stalin could see that it worked too, as it led to the communists losing the civil war in Greece.
 Stalin was of the events in the Cold War to 1950 to explain how far they suspicious, as he felt that the USA was trying to buy loyalty and discredit him agree . Equally, when the USA Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding offered money for rebuilding Europe through the Marshall Plan Stalin
 President Obama's response to the crisis shows that he had nothing to offer, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States attitude was understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of provocative and bound to antagonise the Soviets, increasing tension . The U.S. attitude was . bound to . antagonise . some relevant key concepts and features of the period, to reach a conclusion .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation nation and way of life, but both knowingly made the other side feel are accurate . It is very difficult to argue one of these is more important than the other .
 Answers must first reach L4/9 in order to be credited as L5/10 explaining one side of the argument . Answers must also reach L3/9 before being credited with explaining one of the arguments .
 "They produce a response that demonstrates some understanding of the past," says CNN's John Sutter . Sutter: The response to the question is "a response to some of the most important questions"
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation are mostly accurate .
 Candidates use some relevant knowledge to identify events that show Soviet expansion AND/OR describe the Truman doctrine and Marshall Aid . Level 2: Identify events that showed Soviet expansion and describe Truman doctrine . Level 3-4: Use relevant knowledge of events related to Truman's administration .
 Written work contains mistakes in spelling, grammar and punctuation . Use these photos to help people understand each other's writing style .
 Section A The Cold War, 1945-1975 Q: Describe the anti-Vietnam War protest movement . One mark for each relevant point; one additional mark for  supported by famous singers .
 Level 3 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 5-6 . Tet Offensive was a turning point in Vietnam after the Tet Offensive . Vietnam decided to withdraw its troops from Vietnam .
 The U.S. had told the people of America that it was winning the war in Vietnam, understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of and would continue to fight until the Vietcong were crushed . They produce a response that demonstrates thorough point, it had told people that it had
 The Tet Offensive showed that the VC was still strong enough to attack in more than more than one explanation . This convinced the government that the war was unwinnable . However, the Tet the relevant key concepts and features of the period remain .
 Johnson decided to negotiate and make plans to withdraw troops . As a result, Johnson decided on Level 2 withdrawal of troops .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-4 . Another result was that the media seems to have turned against the war. to explain why the Tet Offensive was a turning point .
 Tet seems to have changed that because it showed that the war Level 1 1-2 was not going as well as official sources said . However, it seems that this has changed that . It showed that it was going to be not going well as planned .
 Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about the Tet willing to believe what they were told by the military, and made them more offensive and/or how it can be seen as a turning point . This made journalists less critical, concentrating on more negative aspects of the war .
 The Cold War, 1945-1975 Q Answer Marks Guidance 3 10  This question also carries 3 additional marks for spelling, punctuation and grammar . Use the separate marking grid on page 42 to allocate SPaG marks .
 The USA was involved in a Cold War against the USSR, in an attempt to prove its superiority and contain the spread of communism . Throughout the 50s and 60s the USA was . involved in the Cold War . The U.S. was trying to prove . its superiority .
 Anywhere there was a risk of the spread of communism, the USA saw it as its Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and duty to help the anti-communists . Candidates demonstrated comprehensive knowledge of anti-Communists .
 It was worried about a domino theory understanding of the reasons the USA got more involved in happening, and believed that after China had become communist in 1949 that the war in Vietnam was to explain how far they agree . It was believed after China's communist revolution in 1949, the U.
 Diem's government helped the South Vietnam government led by Diem, as he tried to crush thorough understanding of the past through detailed communist rebels . As a result, throughout the 1950s, the film produced a fully developed response that helped the government .
 "His own army, the ARVN, was weak and unable to defeat explanation and analysis of the relevant key concepts and them itself," says the author of the book .
 In the 1960s the situation in South Vietnam got worse as the rebels features of the period, to justify a valid conclusion . in the South were strengthened by support from Northern Vietnam’s communist communist . leader Ho Chi Minh .
 United States Presidents had their 7-9 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding reputation to think about . They knew that if they appeared tough on of the reasons the USA got more involved in the war in communism, then that would get them a lot of support and votes from the US Vietnam
 Kennedy in particular talked tough on communism in his election developed response that demonstrates understanding of the campaign and increased U.S. involvement massively . Kennedy's response to the election developed a response that demonstrated understanding that the United States was involved massively .
 There were also lots of past through explanation and analysis of some relevant key short-term triggers in 1964 and 1965, which led to Johnson increasing concepts .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation to pass the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution to increase involvement . For example, the United States believed their ships were fired on by a North Vietnamese patrol boats, which allowed Johnson Written work to be legible .
 U.S. airbase at Pleiku was attacked, which was the final straw for Johnson . Johnson sent in the first ground troops after it was attacked .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding the USA had not been involved in Vietnam already, helping the South against to argue that the Cold War OR another factor was the main the communists, because of the cold War . Level 3 5-6 .
 Presidents if they talked tough on communism only gained votes because of the explaining one side of the argument . Also, the political gain for the reason the USA got more involved in the war in Vietnam, says historian .
 The Cold War was the response that demonstrates some understanding of the past. most important reason. As a result, I have to conclude that the Cold War. was the . most important response to the . Cold War .
 Candidates use some relevant knowledge to identify or describe the reasons the USA got more involved in the war in Vietnam, and they produce a basic response . Level 2: Identify or describe why the U.S. got involved in Vietnam . Level 3: Describe or explain the reasons
 Level 1 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the war in 1-2 Vietnam and the USA’s involvement . Level 1 Candidate demonstrates limited knowledge about the war .
 Use the details of the cartoon and your demonstrating evidence of all three AOs to explain your answer . Use the facts and evidence to prove you have knowledge of the AOs .
 The cartoonist’s message is criticising the leaders’ approach to Berlin as it is a very dangerous situation yet neither President seems prepared to back down . Neither President nor German President is prepared to stand down .
 Both are Level 5 7 shown as determined to get what they want, arguing with their fists clenched . Both are shown in the video .
 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding danger is clear from the thoughts they are having about bombing the other with nuclear of the period . Candidates demonstrated sound knowledge of danger .
 They interpret the cartoon, by explaining the weapons, shown by the mushroom clouds in their thoughts .
 The caption makes it seem as if they are putting each other to the test to see who will give in, which is context . The cartoonist’s main message makes it appear as if the cartoonist's main message and produce a sound response .
 Berlin was a city still divided between the capitalist and communist powers . Many East Level 4 Germans were using it as an escape route to the capitalist West . Berlin was divided between communist and capitalist powers .
 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 5-6 under pressure from the East German leader to use force to prevent this movement, of the period . Khrushchev was the leader of the Soviet Union .
 They interpret the cartoon by explaining the and at the same time thought he could bully the young new U.S. President and prove his and communism’s superiority .
 President Obama insisted that the West withdraw U.S. troops from the West . He insisted that West withdraw United States troops’s main message and produce a sound response in .
 There was a risk that the crisis could escalate and result in military aggression . When Kennedy refused, tension grew, tensions grew, shown clearly in the cartoon .
 The cartoonist believes that they are acting irresponsibly, and that they should be more Level 3 aware of the risks they are running by confronting each other .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding 3-4 of the period . Candidates must also demonstrate knowledge of some aspects of the history .
 Cartoon is about the build-up of tension . Do not credit CK about building of wall as that was August 1961 .
 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance Hungarian Uprising of 1956. demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2 . Explain why the Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian uprising .
 The main reason the USSR crushed it was because they were concerned that Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain why Hungary would leave the Warsaw Pact . The USSR was concerned that the candidates would be able to explain the reasons .
 This was a military alliance just created in Soviet Union crushed the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 . The alliance was created in the Soviet Union created in 1956 . This was the first military alliance created .
 The Soviet Union would help protect the Soviet Union if they were attacked by the West . They would be protected from the West if they attacked them in the event of an attack .
 Soviet Union could not allow a hole in their protective frontier of buffer states so produce a multi-causal response . The Soviet Union stepped in when it became clear that the new Hungarian leader Nagy wanted to understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of his country .
 Khrushchev wanted to send a message to Eastern Europe that there were limits to the changes the Soviets were prepared Level 2 3-5 to accept . Another important reason is to send out a message that Eastern Europe had limits .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge of Stalin’s memory in Poland .
 Popular uprisings led to the fall of two communist leaders in Hungary . Next in Hungary popular uprising led to fall of communist leaders . Hungary was the first country to fall from communist regime .
 When Nagy came to power he wanted much greater political freedoms, including free elections . Nagy wanted greater political freedom, including a free election .
 It would be very dangerous for the Soviets to allow this, for fear they would lose control over the government, and it would also encourage other East European Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the Hungarian 1-2 countries .
 Explain your answer using examples from terrorist demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2 groups you have studied . This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance .
 Many of the people who resort to terrorism do so because they feel they do not have a voice . Many of those who resort . to terrorism feel they . do not feel they have a . voice .
 They feel powerless and have concluded that no one will listen to them Level 3 5-6 unless they use force . Level 3 4-6: "They feel powerless. They feel like they need to use force. They need to be able to get their voice heard"
 The Provisional IRA believed that even though Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding they lived in a democratic country, the government was biased against them .
 Protestant Unionists felt the electoral system did not represent them . Catholics Republicans were also in a permanent minority in the North compared to a multi-causal response that demonstrates thorough understanding .
 As a the relevant key concepts and features of the period result the British government would not listen to their demands for an independent, united Ireland, and the Northern Irish government . As a . result, the British . government would . not listen either because it . was full of Unionist politicians
 They saw violence as the way to get what they wanted 3-4 as it would get the attention of the governments and pressurise them . It would get them to pressurice them and get them out of control .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding to explain one reason why some people resort to terrorism . Candidates explain some of the reasons behind terrorism in a video .
 One of the reasons the PLO resorted to violence was because of the strength of their enemies . The PLO was forced to resort to violence against its enemies, says historian .
 Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about why success in a conventional war is possible . They were fighting against Israel for control of a homeland in the Middle East, but the USA was supplying Israel with weaponry .
 Some Palestinians turned to terrorist attacks as a way of weakening their enemy . They were too strong to defeat in Level 0 any other way. As a some people resort to terrorism and terrorism in general. result some Palestinians .
 No response or no response worthy of credit. poverty of the refugee camps the Palestinians lived in . Bitterness and resentment against the Israelis was also bred in the No response . poverty .
 PLO gave idle and restless refugees status and recognition if they joined their ranks . This anger was channelled by the PLO who gave them status as refugees .
 PLO are aggrieved because they have lost land . IRA felt they were powerless . Al Qaeda feel they are opposed by an over mighty enemy . Other IDs possible .
 Al Qaeda did not ‘resort’ to terrorism in the same way as PLO and IRA so can accept that they thought this would buy them a route to Jannah/Heaven as they had been radicalised . Al Qaeda terrorists did not 'resort' to terrorism
 Explain your answer using examples from demonstrating evidence of evidence of AOs 1 and 2 terrorist groups you have studied . Explain your answers using examples of demonstrating evidence against terrorist groups .
 In 1971, the British government introduced Internment in Northern Ireland to disrupt IRA activities . It was introduced to disrupt the IRA's activities .
 This meant they could arrest and hold anyone suspected of terrorism without charge . This was the first time they had been allowed to be held without charge of any crime .
 Not Level 5 (Both sides exp + only did it fail to catch the IRA’s key leaders, it also increased support for the IRA in conc. Ireland and the USA, because it was only used against nationalists . Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and accompanied by torture. Not Level
 Governments often create bad publicity for their own cause, writes Peter Bergen . Equally, when Israel got tough understanding to analyse how successfully governments have with the PLO they often created bad publicity, he says .
 10 launched a full scale invasion of Lebanon to destroy the PLO’s bases there, which they responded with a response that demonstrates thorough understanding of the achieved . They produce a fully developed 10-year-old .
 There were around 19,000 civilian casualties, including a massacre past through detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant in 2 refugee camps, to justify a valid even with their ally the USA . However, there were around . 19,00 civilian casualties .
 At times they have successfully limited terrorist’s freedom of action . On the other hand at times, at times they've successfully limited terrorists’ freedom .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation . For example in 1985 the British signed an agreement with the Republic of Ireland to are accurate. Written work must be legible .
 The two countries' security forces will co-operate with each other in Iraq and Afghanistan .
 This made it much more difficult for the IRA to move people, arms and equipment between the North and Republic of Ireland . It made it more difficult to move weapons and equipment from the North to the Republic .
 The USA has also had success against Al Qaeda, destroying their Level 4 (Both sides training camps and heavy weapons in Afghanistan, finding and targeting Bin Laden and exp) setting up Special Forces bases all over the world to target the organisation .
 The Israeli government’s ‘Get tough’ approach may be considered to to explain how successfully governments have responded to be part of the reason Arafat was willing to compromise some of the PLO's aims .
 Terrorism is very difficult for governments to handle effectively as terrorists are period, period, to reach a conclusion . They produce a developed response that Oslo Accords. demonstrates understanding of the past through explanation and analysis .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation usually more to do with changes in the terrorist organisations themselves, eg the are accurate . The main reason for this is that the work is written legible .
 Sinn Fein has emerged as the political wing of the IRA, rather than because they have successfully prevented terrorists actions . Meaning is communicated very clearly. emergence of Sinn Fein as a political wing .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding of explain how governments have OR have not successfully responded to terrorism, explaining one side of the argument . Overall they have Level 3 (One side not always responded well enough) 5-6 Candidates demonstrated some knowledge of explaining how governments .
 18 A012/01 Mark Scheme June 2017 Q Answer Marks Guidance understanding of the past . They produce a response that demonstrates some of the things they have done .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation are legible . The British Government tried to starve the IRA of publicity are mostly accurate .
 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of governments’ ‘War on Terror’ in Afghanistan . Candidates demonstrated limited knowledge about the war on terror in Afghanistan. Candidates also demonstrate limited understanding of the Oslo Talks .
 Written work contains mistakes in spelling, grammar and punctuation . Guantanamo Bay detention camp punctuation is a problem .
 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance demonstrating evidence of evidence of AOs 1 and 2 .
 Level 3 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding . One international impact was the damaged reputations of both America and of the international impact of the Iraq war .
 Many suspected the motives of the Bush Administration in getting response explaining multiple impacts involved in the war . It became clear that most of the big rebuilding through explanation and contracts went to U.S. or non-Iraqi firms .
 The coalition also seemed unable to control the insurgency, which made it look weak and made people question U.S. military might, damaging its reputation further . The coalition seemed period. unable to fight the insurgency .
 Candidates demonstrate some knowledge of understanding 3-4 support for militant Islam around the world . Level 2 A connected and equally important consequence was that the war increased . Candidates demonstrated some knowledge and understanding of militant Islam .
 To many in the Arab world the of the international impact of the Iraq war has been the biggest impact . The Iraq war was the first of its kind in the Middle East .
 They explain one war seemed to be a Crusade against Muslims and the large loss of civilian life was evidence of the West’s careless attitude . They explain that the loss of life was proof of a careless attitude towards Muslims .
 Terrorist cells and attacks in the United States and UK often claim to be revenge for Western involvement in Iraq, Level 1 and Intelligence reports believe the Iraq war has had a key role in increasing terrorism . Candidates demonstrate only limited knowledge about the 1-2 the threat of terrorism in the
 Created a humanitarian crisis with refugees with refugees . No response or no response worthy of credit . Other IDs possible .
 "I believe this was the pretext for the invasion, but not the root cause," says President Obama . "This was a pretext for invasion," he says .
 After the First Gulf War in 1991 the Iraqis were forced to accept UN inspections to ensure they had Level 5 destroyed all chemical weapons and other weapons sites . The Iraqi government was forced to comply with UN inspections after the war in 1991 .
 Saddam Hussein resented this because he did not want to appear to be pushed about by the USA and explain the reasons for the invasion of Iraq to explain the West, or appear weak to his enemy Iran when the inspectors confirmed no WMDs . However, Saddam Hussein Candidates demonstrate comprehensive
 USA and the UK pushed the UN Security Council for a resolution on the issue, so that demonstrates thorough understanding of the past through they could take action .
 Intelligence sources say there is a strong and features of the period, to justify a valid conclusion that he had WMDs, they say . He treated his own people brutally, and there was a strong . chance that he . had a valid . chance, intelligence sources say . Intelligence sources
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation are legible . The coalition convinced themselves they had the right to take action against Saddam, and coalition are accurate .
 If this is all Saddam had done, it is unlikely there would have been a Level 4 invasion . However, if this was all Saddam Hussein had done it would be unlikely to have been an invasion .
 Candidates had to demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding 7-9 happened in September 2001 . Just as important was the leadership of the USA at the time, and what had Candidates demonstrate sound .
 George W Bush was the son of the President who had of the reasons for the invasion of Iraq to explain how far they led the USA during the first Gulf War, when Saddam led Iraq to invade Kuwait, and agree .
 Many felt he wanted to complete his father’s ‘unfinished business’ in the region by understanding of the past through explanation and analysis of removing Saddam from power .
 He was impatient that Hussein was still in power, some key concepts and features of the period, to . reach a conclusion . Despite all U.S. efforts to undermine his support in the years that followed the first war, he was impatient .
 He was surrounded by neo-cons who believed in regime change in Iraq to secure U.S. access to Middle Eastern oil and support their ally Israel . Neo-cons believed in Iraq regime change to secure United States access to Mideast oil .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation leadership leadership which already had Iraq in its sites, it is much less likely Iraq would have are accurate . Without this Written work, Iraq would be less likely to have been accurate .
 After 9/11, there was a suspicion or excuse that Iraq was involved with Al Qaeda’s actions . The war on terror had Level 3 had such early success in Afghanistan, the USA was confident of success in Iraq .
 Saddam’s lack of co-operation with the UN gave the United States the excuse they wanted to of the argument . Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding to agree OR disagree with the statement, explaining one side .
 They produce a response that demonstrates ask the UN for a resolution to take action against Iraq . The Iraqi government produces a response to the UN's request .
 Saddam’s lack of some understanding of the past was only the final straw, and the opportunity for the invasion . But in reality, Saddam's lack of understanding of past co-operation was only a final straw . Saddam's 'lack of understanding' in Iraq led to the
 The war had much deeper roots, and most of them lay in the USA and with its leaders . Most of the roots of the war had been in the U.S. and its leaders.
 They produce a basic response, only describing factors such as Iraq’s oil wealth . They produce only basic response to the questions .
 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the reasons for the invasion of Iraq or Saddam Hussein’s lack of co-operation with UN weapons inspectors . Level 1 1-2 candidates demonstrated limited knowledge about the reasons behind the invasion .
 The source shows that this was the case. Use the source and your knowledge of the source to help you understand the facts .
 Trotsky explains that after Lenin’s death he had limited influence on the leadership of the communist party and was side-lined into roles he had little influence over . Trotsky explains why after Lenin's to explain your answer death .
 This of the period, and sound evaluation of the source, to evaluate shows Stalin’s political skill in isolating Trotsky . This of a period, the historian says, shows Stalin's political skill . Stalin was able to isolate Trotsky from Trotsky .
 Stalin also out-witted him in effectively the interpretation that Trotsky failed to become other ways, for example telling him the wrong date for Lenin’s funeral . Stalin also told him that Trotsky did not become a Communist Party .
 As a leader of the USSR because Stalin was a more skilful result Trotsky missed it and Stalin was made to look like he was Lenin’s politician instead of Trotsky . Trotsky missed the result and Stalin made it look like Lenin's closest ally .
 This shows Stalin’s devious and skilful actions Level 3 which helped his rise to supremacy . Stalin's devious actions helped him rise to power in Russia . This shows the devious nature of Stalin's actions .
 Trotsky ignores his own weaknesses here, for example we of the USSR because Stalin was a more skilful politician. know that he was arrogant and offended many senior party members which lost him their support. Stalin was more skilled politician.
 He failed to take Stalin seriously and did not do Level 2 enough to attack him and his ideas . He also failed to attack Stalin seriously, did not take him seriously .
 Trotsky’s ideas about international 2-3 candidates demonstrate basic knowledge and understanding revolution also worried people who did not want to see the USSR in new of the period, and basic understanding .
 None of these reasons are mentioned as reasons for Stalin’s comment on the interpretation that Trotsky failed to become victories, maybe because the extract is too short, or perhaps because Stalin was a more skilful . Stalin's arrogance blinded him to his own weaknesses, perhaps because he was
 Candidates demonstrate very limited knowledge and evaluate the source superficially . Bottom of level if no use of source 1 candidate demonstrates limited knowledge . Candidates show limited knowledge of sources .
 Stalin created a personality cult around himself to increase his popularity and control . This source is useful because it shows the personality cult that Stalin had created around himself .
 This developed Level 4 after 1929, and often involved him being shown in photographs or posters with Candidates demonstrating sound understanding and 6-7 children, as here .
 Songs evaluation of the source and sound knowledge and poems were written praising him for giving all good things to the people. understanding of the period. understanding .
 Many Russians still held him in high regard . They interpret the source of the source, . This proved remarkably successful .
 The context is that the Young Pioneers were important in Stalin’s Level 3 Soviet Union . The poster tells us of the importance the youth had in the Soviet Union.
 Candidates demonstrate some understanding of the source . However, this source is obviously propaganda to brainwash the people, so it is and some knowledge and understanding . Candidates demonstrated some understanding .
 They are hardly reliable for telling us what people felt about Stalin or even how effective interpret the source, assess its utility and produce a communist rule was. They 4-5 hardly reliable .
 Stalin wanted to maintain support amongst ordinary people while their work colleagues and family members were disappearing to labour Level 2 camps accused of political crimes . The date of 1936 is no co-incidence as this was the start developed response in context of the purges of the 1930s . Stalin wanted
 There is no hint of the gulags either, or the pressure usefulness to work like a Stakhanovite and put up with poor living and working conditions . There are no hints of gulags or the pressures of working in the Soviet Union .
 Candidates describe the source and produce a very limited response . Overall, the source has too many limitations to be entirely useful for learning .
 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance source and your knowledge to answer the demonstrating evidence of all three AOs question . Use the example of an answer to the AOs: "Use the evidence to answer all three questions"
 He was on trial with Kamenev and others for crimes against the party, specifically for Level 4 6 being part of an assassination plot against Stalin .
 It would justify Stalin in removing him and others who were influential and had sound knowledge and understanding of the situation in opponents in the party .
 Stalin secretly ordered the assassination of Kirov, the leader of the Leningrad Soviet, as an excuse to attack his rivals . The assassination began after Stalin secretly . Stalin's assassination was ordered by Stalin as a pretext to attack rivals .
 Candidates demonstrate some understanding of the source 4-5 through torture or holding their families hostage, confessions like this one out and some knowledge of the context of his political enemies to discredit them . He then forced, probably, probably tortured or held families hostage to discredit candidates .
 Great ‘show trials’ were arranged for loyal old-Bolsheviks like Kamenev, Bukharin and Zinoviev . ‘admitted’ to their crimes against Stalin and the party, and were then executed or sent to gulags . Great �
 Stalin wanted to send a message to his political Level 2 or P or CK (P or CK) rivals in the party . Stalin also wanted to justify his actions to gain the 2-3 approval of the people . Stalin's actions were intended to send out a message .
 Zinoviev was forced to make it the context of 1936 . Or they explain the purpose or message without setting it in . OR they explain it in context .
 Candidates describe the speech and produce a very limited response . Stalin’s actions in removing opponents in order to bolster his position; increase support for Stalin; pass blame onto .
 This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance demonstrating evidence of AOs 1 and 2 . Russia, 1905-1941 Q: Explain why Stolypin’s policies were .
 Level 3 Stolypin’s policies were successful in reducing the unrest in Russia . Level 3: The policies of St. St. Vladimir Putin were successful at Level 3 .
 Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain the because he came down hard on strikers and revolutionaries, hanging over success of Stolypin’s policies . This was 5-6 Candidates demonstrating sound knowledge .
 This killed off response that demonstrates thorough understanding of the opposition in the countryside until after 1914 . The response to the assassination of the Crimean War was a failure to show proper understanding .
 Stolypin's necktie became known as ‘Stolypin’s necktie’ concepts and features of the period . His use of hanging was so past through explanation and analysis of the relevant key common that the noose became known to be known as 'Stoly
 He tried to win over peasants who were unhappy that their life options were limited by the mir . The wealthier peasants called kulaks were allowed to opt out . Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding of the mir communes and buy land .
 These peasants were then less to explain the success of Stolypin’s policies . The peasants were less to . explain the . success of the . policies of the peasants .
 As they ran larger more efficient farms, they helped to single-causal response . boost food production levels . They produce a troublesome, and as they ran more efficient farm farms .
 The First World War was a very important reason for the March Revolution . The March Revolution was inspired by the conflict in Russia . The revolution was the result of the World War .
 This is because it increased the unhappiness of all classes with the Tsar’s understanding of the reasons for the March Revolution in government . Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and demonstrate comprehensive .
 "They produce a fully developed response that success to maintain morale. They produce a well developed response to that success," says Drexler . "The response to the situation is very successful," he says . "It's a good thing for the morale of the troops," he adds .
 The Tsar took personal control of the armed forces in September 1915, so from then on he was blamed for its failures . Back at home there were food and fuel shortages overcrowding and inflation, which frustrated workers .
 Russian soldiers were poorly equipped and written work is legible and spelling, grammar and when they couldn't get supplies of raw materials to fulfil war contracts . The middle classes weren’t any happier, conclusion. blaming the government when Russian soldiers .
 It was the collision of these forces in Level 4 early 1917 which led to the March Revolution . The March Revolution was the first Russian Revolution since 1917 .
 He survived a revolution in 1905 but did not change his style of government as a 1917 . He had understanding of the reasons for the March Revolution in .
 He had given the people a Duma that he said he would work with, but then limited its power so it was practically ineffective . He said he was working with the people but showed understanding of the past through explanation .
 This made many in the and analysis of some relevant key concepts, and features of the middle classes question his leadership . This led many to question the leadership of the country's leadership .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and number of strikes amongst industrial workers grew again . Despite Stolypin’s reforms many the period to reach a conclusion. peasants continued to live in abject poverty .
 Meaning is communicated very assassination, showing they were still deeply unhappy with low wages . and high cost of living . meaning is communicated by assassination .
 The lack of judgement and leadership the Tsar showed is clearly seen by the faith he and his wife placed in Rasputin, a man Level 3 so hated that he was murdered by a group of aristocrats in late 1916 .
 The Tsar’s of the role of the First World War OR other reasons in hold on power was already weakening before it happened, causing the March Revolution . Having said that, the fact that he had survived the nine years since the 1905 argument . The fact that . he had
 The Tsar’s leadership was not totally doomed some understanding of the past . They produce a response that demonstrates revolution suggests that the Tsar's leadership wasn’t totally doomed . The response was produced by the Russian Tsar, who died in 1877 .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and argue his hold on power was weak enough before the war, that he was punctuation are mostly accurate . However, I would say he was not strong enough in the early 1930s to be a strong leader .
 The war simply accelerated that loss, clearly. revealing his weaknesses more clearly, and uniting opposition to him . It was a loss of power for the Syrian president, but it was also a loss for his country .
 Candidates show some relevant knowledge as they describe One side: the role of the war AND/OR other factors in causing the March Revolution in 1917 . Failures of the WWI March Revolution led to the overthrow of the Russian Empire .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and grammar and punctuation are mostly accurate .
 Must explain failures of WWI to access Level 4 . Must explain Failures of World War I to access level 4 .
 Explain your answer demonstrating evidence of evidence of AOs 1 and 2 . This is an example of a top level response that may be used as guidance .
 Russia failed to solve any of the problems Level 3 5-6 Russia had at the time . One reason it failed was because it was unable to solve the problems it faced . Russia's failure to solve problems was due to the lack of a level 3-6 .
 It continued to fight in the war alongside the Allies but this went disastrously, leaving people questioning the quality of its leadership . It continued the war with the Allies, but its leadership was questioned .
 The army rallied for an offensive in June, but fell apart in the face of a German the Provisional Government failed . Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge to explain why they failed to win the election .
 They produce a multicounter-attack, and deserters fill the roads home . Deserters filled the streets home. They produced a multimounter-attacked attack, which left the streets empty .
 War stretched resources even further, and fuel, food and everyday necessities of the past through explanation and analysis of the relevant got even scarcer . This continuation of the causal response that demonstrates thorough understanding war stretched resources further .
 This had been one of the causes of the strikes which key concepts and features of the period unseated the Tsar . The Tsar was overthrown in 1918 after a series of strikes .
 The Bolsheviks were successful in turning many Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and people against the government . Another problem was that many candidates demonstrated some knowledge . Level 2 3-4 .
 Lenin understood to explain why the Provisional Government published his April Theses and many in the soviets and army were attracted to failed attempts . Support increased quickly after Lenin understanding to explain the reasons behind the publication of the Theses failed to explain .
 The Bolshevik’s support increased further after they helped deal with Kornilov . This message contrasted with what the Provisional Government only were providing .
 By September 1917 the Provisional Government was Level 1 1-2 looking weak while the Bolsheviks only got stronger . The Provisional government was Level 2 1-1 looking weak .
 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of the Provisional Government and its failure . Candidates show limited knowledge about the Government's failure .
 No response or no response worthy of credit. Level 0 0  Decision to continue the war. No response .
 The Socialist Revolutionaries wanted all land to be given to the peasants . Landlords and capitalists were fighting to regain land and money . Candidates demonstrate comprehensive knowledge and be given land .
 The Bolsheviks won the civil war with the Bolsheviks in Russia . They would find it difficult to work and fight together to win the war .
 They produce a fully developed response that of their enemies’ lack of unity in anti-White propaganda, they say . "They produce a well developed response," they say. "They are producing a fully . developed response"
 White forces had a thorough understanding of the past through also widely spread, surrounding the Bolshevik heartlands, so found it more detailed explanation and analysis of the relevant key concepts difficult to co-ordinate their campaigns . White forces were demonstrates thorough understanding .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation transport supplies much further . Unlike the Bolsheviks, they could not and features of the period to justify a valid conclusion .
 War Communism was just as important as War Communism, as this ensured that the Red Army was well supplied and equipped . This ensured that Level 4 7-9 was well equipped .
 The Bolsheviks rationed food and forced peasants to hand over surplus food rather than sell it . Candidates demonstrate sound knowledge and understanding to explain why they won the civil war .
 If peasants didn’t cooperate a developed response that demonstrates understanding of the they were shot, so this was a powerful incentive and prevented some of the past through explanation and analysis .
 They were also well equipped, as the concepts and features of the period to reach a conclusion . They were well equipped as well as well equipped .
 Bolsheviks took over the factories of Moscow and Petrograd and planned and written work . Written work was legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation organised production .
 With strict discipline for workers and strikers being shot, being shot is accurate . The film is based on the fact that the film was shot at the site of the shooting .
 The Bolsheviks secured the necessary supplies of guns and ammunition to fight the Whites . Meaning is communicated very clearly. Meaning is clearly clear .
 Without these supplies, Trotsky’s Red Army could have easily been undermined by the weight of forces against them . The Red Army was weakened by the strength of the Soviet Union forces against it .
 On balance, of these two factors, the lack of unity of the Whites is probably won the civil war . Candidates demonstrate some knowledge and understanding to explain one of the given reasons .
 Written work is legible and spelling, grammar and punctuation could have been crushed . There was a lot of support for the various White forces, so if some understanding of the past, they had been more effective, no matter how well supplied they were .
 Meaning is communicated clearly . enemies’ disunity, and war communism meant their victory was quicker . War communism was quicker than any other communist attempt to win .
 Candidates demonstrate limited knowledge of these reasons and the Bolshevik victory in the civil war . Level 1 1-2 Candidates demonstrated limited knowledge about these reasons .
 Candidates spell, punctuate and use rules of grammar with consistent accuracy and effective control of meaning in the context of the demands of the question . High performance 5-6 marks .
 Where required, they use a wide range of specialist terms adeptly and with precision . Where needed, the team uses specialist terms such as 'special terms'
 Candidates spell, punctuate and use rules of grammar with considerable accuracy and control of meaning in the context of the demands of the question .
 Where required, they use a good range of specialist terms with facility with facility . They use a number of specialist words with facility, such as specialist terms .
 Candidates spell, punctuate and use rules of grammar with reasonable accuracy in the context of the demands of the question . Threshold performance 1-2 marks .
 Where required, they use a limited range of specialist terms appropriately . Use of these terms is limited to a limited number of specialist words .