 This form of “sentimental militarism’s” helped create popular support for the ongoing militarization of American society and its overseas actions in places like Korea . White Christmas, The Caine Mutiny and Mister Roberts helped create public support for American society .
 Markusen says the needs of a defense-based economy dramatically transformed occupational and residential patterns in the United States into something qualitatively different and unique . Using a range of statistics, Markusen. Markusen demonstrates that a defense .based economy has transformed occupational, residential patterns .
 This restructuring around the ‘gunbelt’ regions, she argues, had several negative consequences, not least the draining of the federal treasury and the deepening of the urban crisis in older industrial centers . This restructuring has led to an urban crisis, she says .
 The remaining chapters focus either on the interaction between gender roles, sexuality, and Cold War language or on the Cold War’s impact on child-rearing . The next chapter focuses on gender roles and sexuality .
 All the essays are thought-provoking and well documented, and the editors have done a . ªne job of making them as coherent as possible, they say . The editors have made the essays coherent and thought- provoking .
 The volume is essential reading for those interested in U.S. Cold War culture .
 Alice George has set out to right the balance, and in Awaiting Armageddon she has made a welcome contribution to a crowded shelf . The book is a welcome addition to a long list of titles that have been published before .
 George begins with a brief narrative of the main events of the public week of the crisis . In six chapters plus an introduction and conclusion, he discusses how Americans reacted psychologically and behaviorally to nuclear vulnerability and possible imminent catastrophe .
 Her analysis of these topics provides a great deal of detail and color normally missing from histories of the event . Always fascinating, often gripping, and occasionally poignant, she writes .
 Readers who remember having lived through the crisis will be transported, possibly in an unsettling way, back in time . Readers who have lived through crisis will find themselves transported back to time, perhaps in a way .
 Readers who do not remember the crisis will . ‘nd in George’s lucid prose the best available proxy for the lived experience,’ he writes . Readers who don’t remember the . crisis will ‪nd in . George, George”
 The book is extremely effective in recapturing the sense of the time, but does not do so in a way that will shock or surprise . Nonetheless, although the book is very effective, it is not surprising or surprising .
 George shows that many Americans were profoundly scared during the crisis, but also that many were not . George was profoundly scared, but not scared, during the time of the crisis . George: "I'm not scared. I'm scared. George is scared"
 She suggests some who reacted calmly may have been in denial, though others may not . She suggests that some may have reacted calmly .
 The Kennedy administration's handling of the crisis reºected a greater concern for avoiding a nuclear holocaust than for keeping Congress for the Democrats . She reminds us that the crisis took place in the context of a midterm election campaign . She concludes that, at the end of the day, the
 The Cuban missile crisis played a bigger role in unsettling American politics and society than we typically recognize . George comes close to advancing a thesis, but does so timidly and tentatively .
 I could assert that the missile crisis was the real fount of that loss of faith, which still permeates American culture to this day, but to do so would be to embrace a fallacy . To do so, to do that would be an admission of a fallacy, he says .
 Although Awaiting Armageddon is not a book about the high politics of the missile crisis, it evinces a good grasp of the voluminous literature . The book is not only about the politics but also about the literature itself .
 The story of the missile crisis continues to evolve, more than forty years after the event, and the ‘facts” are something of a moving target . The story has evolved over the past forty years .
 George has written a compelling book whose importance will only increase with time . Fewer and fewer people are able to recall the visceral horror of contemplating imminent nuclear death .
 What makes the book compelling, aside from its thoroughness, is how vividly George conveys her own experience of the crisis . What makes it compelling is that she conveys the experience of her own .
 Awaiting Armageddon is not a didactic exercise but an attempt to come to grips with and to memorialize a trauma that was as personal as it was social and political . The book is not only an attempt but to come .