 Two superpowers overarmed with nuclear weapons challenged each other in what could have spiraled so easily into the ultimate catastrophe . The U.S. and Russia are the two most powerful superpowers .
 Robert Kennedy’s Thirteen Days has become a minor classic in its laconic, spare evocation by a participant of the shifting moods and maneuvers of the most dangerous moment in history .
 I didn't fully understand until I attended a conference on the missile crisis in Havana in January 1992 . Just how dangerous it was I didn’t fully understand, he says, until he attended the conference .
 The Havana conference was the fifth in a series of conferences on the missile crisis . The conference was held in Havana .
 What began as an all-American affair next acquired Russian participants . The U.S. joined in with Russia in the 1980s .
 My belief when I went to Havana was that we had over-dramatized the danger. My belief was that . My belief is that . I believe that . We had overstated the danger, he says .
 Nikita Khrushchev was well aware that the U.S. had conventional superiority in the Caribbean and nuclear superiority overall . After all, the United States was aware of its conventional superiority . The United States won't be surprised by the success of the Caribbean .
 General Anatoly Gribkov was in Cuba during the Soviet military deployment . He described the 13-day mission to Cuba as 'the most arresting moment' of the war .
 These included warheads for short-range as well as for long-range missiles . The warheads were included in the arms of the U.S. State Department .
 I was sitting next to Robert McNamara, our Secretary of Defense during the crisis, and he almost fell out of his chair, he said . "I was sitting beside him, and I was ... almost falling out of my chair," he said of McNamara .
 McNamara: Had their advice prevailed, nuclear war would have begun on the beaches of Cuba and might have ended in a global holocaust . McNamara later said, "It would have been a disaster"
 By 1962 Castro’s Cuba was well established as a designated enemy of the U.S. By 1962, Cuba had been declared an enemy of America . Castro's Cuba was established as an ally of the United States .
 After this misbegotten affair, the Kennedy administration sponsored a CIA campaign of harassment and sabotage . After this scandal, the CIA was forced to withdraw from the CIA .
 Operation Mongoose was taken, not unreasonably, as preparation for invasion by U.S. forces . In Havana and in Moscow, it was taken as preparation by the United States forces . Operation 'Mongoose' was taken in Havana and Moscow as preparation .
 We know a surprising amount today about the inner history of the missile crisis . We know more today than ever before about the crisis .
 Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958–1964 draws on hitherto secret Soviet documents . Kennedy, Kennedy, and Castro, 1958-1964, draws on previously secret documents .
 This abundance of new testimony supplements and reinforces Robert Kennedy’s account in Thirteen Days . Robert Kennedy's account was published in Th13 Days .
 Kennedy understood the Soviet ability to act with impunity in the very heart of the American zone of vital interest . U.S. acquiescence in their deployment would demonstrate that the Soviet could act freely .
 Soviet missiles in Cuba might not upset the strategic balance, but they would certainly upset the political balance and have a profoundly destabilizing effect on the world power balance . The missiles could destabilize the balance of world power and destabilize domestic politics .
 Kennedy was equally determined to get the missiles out peaceably . Kennedy, as his brother emphasized in Thirteen Days, was determined to do so .
 There is the theory that John and Robert Kennedy were “obsessed” with Castro and out to destroy him . There is also a theory that the Kennedy brothers were ‘obsessed with Castro’
 If this had been the case, the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba would have provided a heaven-sent pretext to invade Cuba and smash Castro forever, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: The deployment of nuclear missiles would have been a heaven sent pretext for invasion .
 Robert Kennedy led the fight against military intervention, and John Kennedy made the decision against it . Instead Robert Kennedy fought against the idea of military intervention in Vietnam .
 The President’s purpose was to stop the delivery of further missiles through the naval ‘quarantine’ of Cuba . The President's purpose is to stop further missiles being delivered by the naval "quarantine" of Cuba.
 He did not think Khrushchev would initiate a nuclear war he was bound to lose . He thought he would lose in a war he thought he wouldn't do so .
 He had not read in vain The Guns of August, Barbara Tuchman’s account of the way the nations of Europe stumbled into the war .
 He took the greatest care to keep the armed forces on the tightest leash, much to their ill-concealed irritation .
 The Bay of Pigs had taught the President to distrust the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The President had a history of distrusting the Joint chiefs of Staff. President George W. Bush was assassinated in 1968 .
 The President resisted a sneak air attack, even when a majority of the Ex Comm favored it . That is why the President resisted, he says .
 U.N. prepared to enlist the United Nations in fallback plans in case bilateral negotiation faltered . President Barack Obama has been in talks with the United States since 2001 .
 Trade of U.S. missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba was a possible way out . That is why from an early point he saw a trade of American missiles in . Turkey for Cuba was seen as a way out of the Soviet Union .
 Robert Kennedy sent Robert Kennedy on a secret mission to Anatoly Dobrynin to arrange the trade . Robert Kennedy's secret mission was arranged by the ambassador to arrange a trade deal .
 Secrecy was deemed essential lest disclosure of the trade anger NATO allies abroad and hard-liners at home . The U.S. government sought to keep the trade secret, fearing it would anger allies abroad .
 The deal remained secret until I came across the relevant documents in Robert Kennedy’s papers and published them in 1978 . Robert Kennedy and His Times was published in 1978 in a book published by Kennedy .
 Khrushchev, whose gambler’s throw precipitated the crisis, proved to be equal partner in resolving it . The Russian leader's gamble led to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 As the American military objected to the rejection of an invasion, the Soviet military objected . As the U.S. military objected, the withdrawal of the missiles was objected to .
 Khrushchev asked if his brass hats would guarantee that keeping missiles in Cuba would not bring about nuclear war . Khrushchchev: They looked at him "as though I were out of my mind or, what was worse, a traitor"
 Far from neglecting the dangers of nuclear war, he had a keen sense of what they were . Far more than neglecting nuclear war was he was aware of the dangers .
 Far from opposing a compromise, he pushed for one more strongly than anyone else in his administration . President Obama pushed for a compromise with Republicans .
 He bypassed the Ex Comm at the most critical moments, and may have seen it as more useful for consensus-building than for decision-making .
 Far from placing the nation and the world at risk to protect his own reputation for toughness, he probably would have backed down, in public if necessary, whatever the domestic political damage might have been . Far more likely to have put the nation at risk than put it at risk .
 There may be, in short, room here for a new profile in courage . But it would be courage of a different kind from what many presumed that term to mean throughout much of the Cold War .
 Had the Soviet missiles remained in Cuba, the 1960s would have been a most dangerous decade . The 1960s was a dangerous decade for the Cuban people .
 He would like to prevent a nuclear war but is under severe pressure from his hard-line crowd . The hard-liners interpret every move in that direction as appeasement .
 Kennedy was exploring the possibility of normalizing relations with Castro’s Cuba a year after the missile crisis . As for the alleged Kennedy obsession with Fidel Castro, the president was exploring normalization of relations with Cuba .
 In November 1962, while the 13 days were still fresh in his mind, Robert Kennedy dictated a memorandum to himself . Kennedy dictated the memo to himself in November 1962 . In November 1963, Kennedy was still in the throes of the assassination .