 The assassination itself was carried out by a sole killer, Lee Harvey Oswald, out of his admiration for Fidel Castro and his animosity toward the American Government and its President . Oswald was the sole killer .
 The question that remains open after fifty years gone by is whether Castro was aware of the Kennedy brothers’ plots against him . Castro was perfectly aware of a Cuban double agent who had proposed to the CIA that he assassinate Castro .
 The list included, besides presidents, also writers and others, including…baseball players . Baseball players. Baseball players .
 It was a slap, the motive behind which was unclear…unless it was a relic of the religious wars – Kennedy having been the first Catholic president of the U.S. The motive behind the slap was unclear .
 The attack had been carried out by Russian troops on orders of Fidel Castro . Fidel Castro had ordered the attack on the island .
 The margin between a political solution to the crisis and a nuclear holocaust was extremely thin throughout the 13 days of the crisis . The President warded off the insistent appeals by most of his senior military officers for an immediate attack on Cuba .
 Curtis LeMay, the head of the Air Force and the most hawkish of these officers, was disrespectful toward the ‘young’ President in person . He railed against him during the latter’s occasional absences from the Situation Room .
 The famous 13 days comprised the period between the discovery of the missiles by the American U-2 airplane on October 15, 1962 and the move toward a political solution . Nikita Khrushchev announced on October 27 that he was removing the missiles from the island since Kennedy had agreed not to
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy succeeded in convincing the Soviet Ambassador in Washington, Anatoli Dobrynin, that because of the United States legislative elections that were coming up in the following month, the agreement had to remain secret . President Kennedy would look weak before American voters .
 The Soviets stuck to their word, respecting the agreement made by the two interlocutors . The Soviets paid tribute to the Soviet Union for their cooperation .
 The Soviet Union came off as the loser in the missile crisis, says CNN's John Sutter . But because of this fact, he says, the Soviet Union was not the loser . Sutter: "From the point of view of public relations, public relations was the worst"
 The danger had been so great during the missile crisis that President Kennedy made an effort to ensure that such a situation should never arise again . The danger was so great that Kennedy made a special effort to prevent it from happening again .
 First agreement on nuclear disarmament – the Limited Test Ban Treaty – was signed in the summer of 1963 . In addition to the first agreement on disarmament, the first nuclear test ban treaty was also signed in 1963 .
 President Kennedy was assassinated at Dallas, Texas, on November 22 November 1963 . The president was assassinated a year after the missile crisis . He was assassinated in 1963 .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was himself shot dead before then end of the weekend . The back story to this act still remains mysterious, from the fact that the killer was himself killed .
 He had participated earlier that autumn in a rally in New Orleans in support of the Cuban regime . He had also participated in an anti-Cuban rally .
 Oswald might have had contacts with agents of the powerful Cuban intelligence service, the Directorate General of Intelligence . What remains unknown is the question of contacts Oswald had with Cuban agents in Mexico City .
 The question remains open as to whether Fidel Castro himself might have been implicated in the assassination of the young American President . And in the final analysis, the question remains .
 Nothing concrete has emerged as to the involvement of the Cuban government or Cuban intelligence in the assassination of Fidel Castro . Oswald acted on his own, out of his admiration for Castro .
 Perhaps after the death of Castro more will be learned about the role of the Cubans in Cuba . Perhaps after Castro's death more will have been learned about his role in Cuba's role in the country .
 Castro, because of his reckless temperament, would make a perfectly credible sponsor of an operation to assassinate the President . Castro had information he possessed concerning the plots of the Kennedy brothers against his person . Castro's reckless temperament would make him a credible sponsor .
 Le Monde published a series of letters exchanged between Castro and Khrushchev in 1990 . The letters were exchanged between the Cuban leader and the Soviet leader . Castro asked Khrushche to initiate a nuclear war in the event that American forces attacked Cuba .
 Fidel Castro prepared to sacrifice his country for the benefit of a future world of communism . Fidel Castro was prepared to give up his country to a future of communism in Cuba . Castro's death was the result of his sacrifice .
 The danger that this aggressive policy poses for humanity is so great that following that event the Soviet Union must never allow the circumstances in which the imperialists could launch the first nuclear strike against it . If…the imperialists invade Cuba with the . goal of occupying it, the . danger that
 Khrushchev informed Castro that a solution was in sight, as President Kennedy had promised not to invade Cuba . In a message of 27 October, President Kennedy promised to not invade Cuba. Castro was in the midst of a crisis .
 Khrushchev advised Castro not to be carried away by his emotions and not to respond to provocations, such as the attack he ordered against an American U-2 airplane on 27 October, which claimed the life of the pilot . Castro ordered an attack on an American plane, killing the
 Earlier isolated violations were committed without a determined military purpose or without a real danger stemming from those flights . The U.S. military says the violations are not related to a military threat .
 You proposed that we be the first to launch a nuclear attack on the territory of the enemy . In your ... proposal, you proposed that . We be first to . launch a . nuclear attack .
 Rather than a single strike, it would have been the beginning of a thermonuclear war . The first strike would have seen the end of a nuclear war, the U.S. says .
 We knew, and one must not think otherwise, that we would be annihilated, as you indicated in your letter, if there was a nuclear war . We knew that one would not be able to think otherwise of the threat .
 Khrushchev sent the seasoned diplomat, Anastas Mikoyan, to Havana to continue the discussions with the Cuban leaders . Shortly after this exchange of letters, Mikoyans sent the diplomat to Havana .
 Guevara: "Even in the context of all our respect for the Soviet Union, we believe that the decisions made by the . Soviet Union were a mistake," he said .
 We see your readiness to die beautifully but we believe that it isn’t worth dying beautifully . We see you ready to die but we don't think that it’s worth dying .
 Castro was amply informed of U.S. intentions against Cuba and against Castro himself, the Cuban leader says . Castro had been informed of American intentions against him, he says .
 Castro became aware of the hostility of the United States towards his regime . After he had seized power, Castro had become aware of U.S. hostility . Castro was aware of that hostility .
 Even before he became President, John Kennedy had been alerted by his advisers of the danger of the new revolutionary regime in Cuba . Fidel Castro might invite the Soviets to establish forces on the island .
 Kennedy refused coverage of the landing beach by the United States Air Force, thereby clinching the failure of the operation . There followed the disaster of the Bay of Pigs, an operation inherited from the administration of Dwight Eisenhower .
 The humiliation of the Bay of Pigs fiasco only doubled the determination of the Kennedy brothers to remove Castro . Castro was humiliated by the humiliation .
 In October 1961, a covert operation, codenamed Mongoose, was launched against the Cuban regime . At its head Robert Kennedy, then the AttorneyGeneral, was then the attorney general .
 A so-called Augmented Special Group was created in the White House and set about planning lethal attacks on Castro himself and conducting sabotage operations on the island of Cuba .
 Virtually all these activities either failed or did not see the light of day . Virtually none of these activities were successful or successful .
 The DGI did use a “dangle’s” to learn about American intentions towards Castro and the Cuban Government .
 Rolando Cubela, a DGI agent, let it be known through an intermediary that he was against Castro and was seeking a contact with the Americans . Cubela was seeking to make contact with Americans .
 Cubela met with a CIA officer during the World Youth Festival at Helsinki in 1962 . Later, in July 1962, she met with the CIA officer at Helsinki, Finland . Cubela was a member of the CIA .
 Cubela refused to take a polygraph test when contacted by Cubela . The contact was dropped shortly afterwards, when Cubela failed to take the test . Cubela was the first person to make contact with Cubela, who was in charge .
 In 1963, when the tempo of plots against Castro intensified, a decision at CIA, a Spanish-speaking American operations officer, Nestor Sanchez, met with Cubela at Porto Alegre .
 Presumably this was at Cuban instigation, as Cuba had an embassy there and thus had agents available for counter-surveillance . Cuba had a embassy at the time, so it could be used to spy on Russia .
 Oswald used a rifle with telescopic sights – ironically the same type of weapon that Oswald used against Kennedy . By that point the CIA was preparing to have delivered the rifle to Cubela in Cuba .
 The assassination of the American President the same day cut off further attempts to assassinate Castro . The CIA contact with Cubela was maintained until December 1964 . The assassination was the last attempt to kill Castro .
 In sum, because of Castro’s temperament – his apocalyptic wish for the nuclear obliteration of Cuba followed by the communization of the world, plus the fact of the information from Cubela of the Kennedy brothers’ plans to assassinate him, Castro may well have decided to strike
 In this regard, it is well to keep in mind the role of the CIA in the early 11 Edward Jay Epstein, The Annals of Unsolved Crime, Epilogue .
 The ease with which the CIA overthrew the regime of Jacobo Guzman in Guatemala and that of Mohammed Mossadegh in Iran created an atmosphere of invincibility around the CIA, author says . The ease of overthrowing the governments of Guatemala and Iran gave rise to the idea that
 The Kennedy brothers tried to kill Castro but failed to do so . Castro's failure only redoubled the efforts of the Kennedy brothers to kill him .
 During the Cold War the CIA seems to have underestimated the capabilities of Cuban Intelligence . During the entire period of the . Cold War, the CIA seemed to have . underestimated Cuban Intelligence.
 DGI was able to conceal all these years an involvement with Oswald, author says . DGI has a high degree of professionalism, he says . "One could speculate that, because of the high level of professionalism of the DGI, that organization has been able to ... conceal ... an
 Harvard graduate spent 37 years in the Central Intelligence Agency, 23 of them on assignments overseas . He spent most of his career as an intelligence officer .
 From August 1979-August 1984 he was chief of the Near East South Asia Division in the Directorate of Operations . In August 1979 he was in charge of Near East S. Asia Division .
 After leaving the CIA, he earned a doctorate in public administration at Harvard, in June 1992 .
 For other uses of this article, please contact the H-Diplo editorial staff at h-diplo@h-dplo.msu.edu .