 The leaders of the U.S. and the Soviet Union clashed very publicly over the presence of Soviet missiles on the island of Cuba in October 1962 . The dramatic face-off has exerted a continual fascination on the public and professional historians alike .
 It remains one of the great Cold War set-pieces, a central and mythological episode in any history of the Cold War . It remains a central part of any Cold War history .
 Readers apparently have a limitless appetite for the intricate details of the inner workings of this episode . Many of the details are still emerging, many of them still emerging .
 It may also be argued that the United States emerged as the victor, since the Soviet Union yielded to American insistence that all nuclear weapons, plus bombers that might menace the continental U.S., be removed .
 American officials sought to use both twin strands in their efforts to isolate President Fidel Castro of Cuba and his country . U.S. officials consulted with Latin American foreign ministers in the OAS forum of the Organization of American States .
 One of the strengths of this article is that it strips away some of the myths about the crisis . It's a strong example of the 'myths' of the crisis in Iraq and Syria .
 The news that the Soviets were in the process of installing nuclear-capable missiles on Cuba did not, as is often suggested, come as a total bolt from the blue . The news of the Soviets' installation of the missiles was not as surprising as often suggested .
 The United States military and intelligence services suspected something of the sort might be under way . The U.S. military and . intelligence services—not . mention the media, clearly suspected something . might be . under way, the media and . the media .
 Kennedy had given credence to assurances by Soviet officials and intelligence operatives that the Soviet Union would not place missiles on Cuba . The news was a considerable shock to Kennedy, however, who had given it credence .
 Kennedy and other administration officials were making policy in the absence of any convincing intelligence data . The United States had made clear in advance that the U.S. would be considered provocative .
 Americans were negotiating without any clear understanding of Soviet objectives . Americans were therefore negotiating without understanding Soviet objectives. Americans were also negotiating without clear understanding .
 Defector Oleg Penkovsky provided technical information on the process of arming Soviet R-12 missiles . Kennedy and the Ex Comm realized they had several more days in hand before the missiles became operational .
 CIA analysts failed to realize that several dozen warheads for short-range cruise missiles and medium-range R-12 missiles were already on Cuba . More chilling is the confirmation that, despite all the overflights, when Kennedy made the crisis public knowledge, CIA analysts didn't realize that .
 The Kremlin had forbidden the Soviet commander to use them under any circumstances . Ultimately these were now beyond Moscow’s control, raising the specter that, had the United States launched an invasion of Cuba, these weapons would have been used against United States military personnel and possibly against targets in
 The United States Air Force believed overflights had failed to find four out of a suspected forty missile launchers . The U.S. Air Force said 90 percent accuracy of their strikes against those that had been identified was the best they could promise .
 Pinpoint surgical strikes are beyond the capabilities of U.S. warplanes . Pinpoint strikes were beyond the . capabilities of United States warplanes. Pinpoint . strikes were not the capabilities .
 Kennedy’s top military advisers and some of his civilian officials still advocated the first-strike option . This was initially the preferred choice, and for most of those involved .
 Kennedy’s generals did not balance military and diplomatic imperatives, including the need to win support from U.S. allies . Most civilian advisers, including those in the State Department, tried to balance those imperatives . Kennedy's generals advocated military and unilateral strategies, adding to the
 It can be argued that by deferring irreversible military action and choosing the quarantine or blockade option, the U.S. bought the time needed for diplomacy to work . The United States bought time needed to work.
 U.S. naval actions were combined with overt and well-publicized preparations for an outright invasion of Cuba, involving large-scale deployments of 150,000 military personnel, aircraft, and shipping to bases on the coast of Florida .
 U.S. forces military alert status upgraded to DEFCON-3 on October 22 and 25 on October 25 . The move is only one step short of outright war . The upgrade comes in lockstep with the upgrading of the United States forces alert status .
 Weaver convincingly suggests that while these moves put pressure on the Soviet Union by demonstrating the Kennedy administration’s determination to remove the missiles, at whatever cost, they also escalated the situation . Weaver argues that the move was not only to pressure the Soviets, but also to escalate the situation
 United States military readiness and the state of the invasion force was liable to deteriorate significantly, meaning that only a relatively small window existed in which to resolve the crisis without overt hostilities . For technical reasons, within approximately a fortnight to a month on high alert, the U.S. military
 Much depended on whether Khrushchev and his advisers successfully decoded U.S. signals and, having done so, were willing to dismantle the missiles and take them away .
 The Soviets detected the upgrade to DEFCON-2, but incorrectly interpreted it as meaning an invasion of Cuba was imminent . The Soviets mistakenly interpreted the upgrade as meaning that an invasion was imminent.
 They responded by raising their own military alert status . U.S. intelligence failed to detect the move, officials say .
 Communication between the two major protagonists, let alone understanding, was far from perfect . Communication between them was therefore far from ideal .
 U.S. military threats alone could not dislodge the missiles from Cuba . Their removal from the island ultimately depended on the Soviets . The Soviets ultimately needed to remove the missiles .
 Whether, in strategic terms, they made any great difference to the balance of power was almost irrelevant . Whether they were strategic terms is almost irrelevant, says CNN.com .
 John Lewis Gaddis has pointed out that by positioning intermediate range missiles on Cuba, the Soviet Union greatly reduced the prevailing 17-1 gap in Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles separating itself and the United States . The Soviet Union's presence on Cuba was a significant factor in the Cold War balance
 While the U.S. could successfully interdict the Soviet leadership from transforming Cuba into a nuclear-armed military outpost, it had little if any leverage to restrain a subsequent massive Soviet nuclear build-up .
 In that respect, for the Soviet Union, Cuba represented an almost irrelevant sideshow . The Soviet Union was dominated by the Soviet state of Cuba in the 1960s .
 Revisionist historians have censured him for indulging in reckless and unnecessary Cold War risktaking, especially in Cuba and Vietnam . Historians have criticized him for engaging in unnecessary risktaking .
 At this stage in his political career the president himself was under pressure, not from radicals, liberals, or the left, but from the political right and the Republicans . In the best tradition of Senator Joseph McCarthy stood ready to pound him for being soft on Communism and weak on Cuba .
 Khrushchev and other Soviet officials deliberately attempted to conceal the presence of missiles in Cuba until the elections were over . The Soviet government was aware of the significance of the Cuban elections .
 Given prevailing Cold War orthodoxy and the American political landscape in 1962, the option of simply ignoring missiles or tolerating their presence was not one that was open to Kennedy, or indeed to any other U.S. political leader .
 Kennedy was himself a prisoner of the entrenched Cold War mindset in the U.S. He was a prisoner in the United States. Kennedy was the prisoner of a Cold War mentality .
 Kennedy recognized that the U.S. had a massive interest in resolving the crisis without war . Kennedy was a politician who almost reflexively used and even through his stirring eloquence heightened Cold War rhetoric, .
 In the half-century since his death, Kennedy’s undoubted weaknesses and character flaws have been chronicled in almost obsessive detail . Kennedy's political opportunism and the substantial disconnect between his image and the reality of the individual behind it, have been documented in detail .
 American liberals had derided for possessing less courage than profile . But he found the resilience and determination to withstand the pressures of his military advisers .
 If necessary, Kennedy was prepared to work covertly through the United Nations to accomplish this . Kennedy prepared to use the U.N. to obtain access to the world's most powerful weapons system .
 He also contemplated absorbing a Soviet strike against NATO-controlled Jupiter missiles in Turkey, without necessarily retaliating for this, at least with a nuclear exchange .
 In this respect, one wonders whether the fiasco of the Bay of Pigs eighteen months earlier had been a remarkably well-disguised blessing, in that it left the then inexperienced young President decidedly skeptical .
 Weaver’s account calls into question the by now traditional depiction of Robert F Kennedy as something of a closet dove during the crisis . Weaver's account raises questions about the portrayal of Kennedy as a dove in the 1960s .
 President offered to take Jupiter missiles out of Turkey not too long after the Soviet missiles had left Cuba . He was not, it seems, among the real architects of the discreet and deniable bargain .
 The President’s brother apparently served primarily as a convenient and—because of their relationship—trusted and dependably tightlipped messenger . Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador in Washington, was a trusted and dependable messenger on the subject .
 Khrushchev may have found the decommissioning of the Jupiter missiles was gratifying . However, the Polaris submarine-based weapons that replaced them were if anything more effective .
 Weaver provides less in-depth coverage or insights into that side of the story . Presumably because sources on the Soviet side, though more abundant than in the past, still cannot match the plethora of materials now available on United States and Western policies .
 Khrushchev had decided to withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba . Even before the U.S. secretly offered to remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey, a proposal he regarded as a pleasant if unexpected sweetener . It is enlightening to learn that .
 Khrushchev seems to have shared with Kennedy a distrust of his own highest military advisers . During the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy seemed to be distrusting of his highest advisers .
 Having massively destructive weaponry at one’s disposal that can probably never be used except in a Götterdämmerung scenario itself subjects top generals to undesirable psychological tensions . When a potential opportunity to use these resources does finally arise, they face extreme difficulty in abandoning all hope
 Even today, the objectives of the mercurial and impulsive Soviet president are far from transparent . The objective of the Soviet president is still not transparent, the author says .
 The nature of the then Soviet system of government, dominated by a powerful leader whom few dared to contradict, militated against careful and skeptical consideration of potentially risky courses of action, once the supreme leader had endorsed them .
 Weaver mentions the role of U.S. allies in the crisis, especially the desire of civilian officials and diplomats to retain their support for American policies . Weaver also mentions the desire to retain the support of American policies in Syria .
 It would be instructive to know whether the Soviets feared or even recognized that the jeopardy in which the crisis placed its Warsaw Pact and other communist bloc partners might alienate them and lead them to question Soviet dominance . The Soviets feared the jeopardy may alienate or lead to questions about Soviet dominance
 The People’s Republic of China subsequently issued fervent denunciations of what it characterized as Soviet pusillanimity and betrayal of the communist cause during the Cuban missile crisis . On a contrasting note, it is instructive to note that, with the Sino-Soviet split
 The preoccupation of both the U.S. and the Soviet Union with the Cuban situation also played some part in emboldening China to launch a month-long border war with India on October 20, 1962 . The war was the culmination of several years of border clashes between the two
 Their intense focus on Cuba simultaneously made it more difficult for either superpower to attempt to mediate between China and India .
 The Sino-Indian War was only one example of how the crisis might potentially trigger or facilitate drastic moves elsewhere to resolve contested issues . The crisis might also destabilize the existing international system, which themselves might in turn destabilize .
 As they had at the onset of the Korean War, American officials feared that the ultimate Soviet objective was to take over Berlin . The apprehensions that remained unfounded were unfounded .
 South Korea hoped the crisis would offer a long-awaited opportunity to attack the North, a prospect that horrified the U.S. South Korea's government and military alike hoped it would offer an opportunity .
 South Korean military aircraft grounded to prevent over-enthusiastic pilots from raiding the North . Under American pressure, South Korean aircraft were grounded to stop them from doing so .
 U.S. troops stationed at the Demilitarized Zone turned their weapons south to counter any attempt by their allies to mount an invasion and take over North Korea .
 Many nations undoubtedly responded with relief when the crisis was peacefully resolved . But it might well be worth exploring if and why some did not .
 Despite their ferocious rhetoric, throughout the Cold War the two major protagonists usually demonstrated a certain pragmatic caution when dealing with each other . The two main protagonists refrained from pushing even the bitterest confrontations to the point of outright war .
 Soviet submarines in the waters around Cuba each possessed at least one nuclear-armed 7|Page H-Diplo Article Review torpedo . The torpedo was a Soviet submarine .
 The Soviet government did not pass on this information to the submarines, which became targets for tracking and harassment by United States destroyers . Once the quarantine of Cuba was announced, the U.S. Navy announced the procedures it had devised to persuade such submarines to surface .
 At the height of the crisis, a trigger-happy Russian missile crew shot down a U-2 surveillance aircraft over Cuba . The incident almost brought retaliatory American air strikes against Russia .
 It is increasingly unclear how long the Politburo in the Kremlin could maintain control over the nuclear warheads already present in Cuba . It was increasingly unclear just how long Russia could maintain any control of Cuba's nuclear warheads .
 Many top U.S. and Soviet military figures were apparently itching for war . Many top United States and Soviet officials were itching to go to war .
 At some point almost every leading American official contemplated authorizing air strikes against Cuba and perhaps an invasion . The moves might very easily have escalated the situation to the point where Cuban-based nuclear weapons were used against the United States .
 Weaver’s close scrutiny of just how the crisis evolved leaves one uncomfortably conscious how often, despite some remarkable successes, intelligence operatives misinterpreted or ignored data or quite simply got the facts wrong . Weaver: “I’m not comfortable with how often I’
 Soviet officials relied heavily on what can only be termed guesswork—at best informed guesswork . American and Soviet officials alike were primed with information that was at times less than accurate . U.S. officials were at times more than accurate than their counterparts' estimates .
 For most of the crisis, direct communications between the two sides left much to be desired, while precise information on what was happening on the high seas and over the air in Cuba was patchy and sporadic .
 This work is licensed under a Creative Commons license under the NonCommercial-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 .