 Historians sketch out alternate history of the twentieth century . From Vietnam to Cuba, two historians sketch out an alternate history . Historians: Vietnam, Cuba, Cuba are key moments in history .
 On 22 November 2013, America and the world will observe the 50th anniversary of John F Kennedy’s assassination . Emily Dickinson wrote a poem about the assassination of JFK .
 The media coverage of the anniversary will no doubt prove that, alas, people still find the circumstances of Kennedy's death far more interesting than the achievements of his presidency .
 For the first quarter-century or so after JFK’s murder, insensitive cynics sometimes remarked that having been assassinated was a great posthumous career move for Kennedy . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968, but his career went on to flourish .
 To most, Dallas was tragic because he and his wife and children were beautiful, young and cool . He and his family were young, cool and cool, but he was also beautiful, cool . Dallas was a tragic loss of his life .
 To understand the significance of JFK’s assassination, we need to move beyond the fluff and into a deep analysis of what he actually did and did not do as president . JFK's assassination was the JFK assassination, but to understand its significance, the author says .
 He proved during his 1,036 days in the White House that he had the backbone to face down his hawkish advisers who, on at least six occasions, recommended he go to war .
 We believe a careful consideration of such a hypothetical scenario is important, but are also aware that the exploration involves both opportunities and risks . We are aware of the exploration of such an area as well as the risks .
 On the one hand, something fundamental is missing from histories that lack reference to paths not taken, decisions not made, or histories that seem almost, but not quite, to have happened . On the other hand, it is not possible to think about paths that were not taken or decisions not
 Such histories seem to us sanitised, unreal, lacking in the contingency and uncertainty of historical moments as they pass by, one by one, full of anxiety and regret for those bearing the burden of responsibility . Such histories can be sanitified, unreal and unreal .
 History without an edgy contingency is bound to be uninteresting, says historian . History will make no sense if it is assumed that what happened was bound to happen, he says . History without edgy contingents is bound for uninteresting history .
 Most of us believe intuitively that things could have been different and, in addition, we instinctively search for lessons we might draw from history . Most people think intuitively they could have had a different outcome in history .
 Counterfactual game is little more than a literary parlour game, in which the objective is to showcase the cleverness of whomever is spinning the counterfactual tale . As often practised, it's little more of a literary . game, it is a little more
 The storyline is composed mostly of fictitious events, made seemingly out of thin air . The storyline was composed of mostly fictitious events .
 Vietnam If Kennedy Had Lived: Virtual history can yield important insights into history as it happened . Counterfactual history is purely to entertain, with few exceptions to entertain . Virtual history, however, can lead to lessons applicable to present and future .
 Virtual history requires the historian to move more deeply into the experience of a historical character and/or events of interest . Virtual history is a form of history that can be done in a virtual world . The historian must move more into the virtual world of historical character .
 The focus is on what happened, how what happened forms a recognisable pattern, and why it makes sense to project that pattern cautiously into account of subsequent history that did not happen, but perhaps could have happened .
 Actual JFK JFK JFK’s well-documented record of his decisions on matters of war and peace is as astonishing as it is unambiguous . JFK's record is as remarkable as it's unambiguous, and his decisions are as unambiguous as they are .
 We now know that no American president was ever pressured more intensely or more often to take the U.S. to war . President George W. Bush was pressured to go to war more often than any other president .
 His advisers lobbied him, attempted to intimidate him and schemed throughout his presidency to force him to authorise direct U.S. military interventions . His advisers also schemed to force the President's approval of direct US military intervention .
 Kennedy successfully resisted pressure to intervene militarily even though, each time, it would have been politically popular, at least initially . In each case, he successfully resisted their pressure to act militarily, even though they would be politically popular initially .
 JFK was regularly out in front of his advisers in articulating what might go wrong if military force was used as an early option rather than, as he believed, a last resort, and how such action, if taken, could escalate into a disaster .
 A half-century after JFK’s assassination in Dallas, we know that he was right, and that those counselling the use of force were wrong . We know that JFK was right to kill himself in Dallas .
 We now have the data necessary to calculate with confidence the probable result if JFK had ordered, for example, the demolition of the Berlin Wall after 13 August 1961, when its construction by the East Germans and Soviets began . Or an invasion of Cuba during the October 1962 missile crisis .
 Had Kennedy caved in to his hawkish advisers on any of these occasions, the probable result would have been a disastrous war . Kennedy's hawkish advisors estimated the war would be much bloodier and more costly than their estimates .
 We know what Soviet leaders were thinking during the Berlin Wall and Cuban missile crises, and what they were prepared to do in the event of a U.S. military intervention . Today, we know what the Soviets were thinking about during those crises .
 Many of JFK’s advisers argued that the Soviets, woefully inferior to the U.S. in deliverable nuclear weapons, would act “rationally” by not acting at all . The Soviets would act "rationally" rather than challenge the United States with a
 Aggressive U.S. military action over Berlin or Cuba would have led to war between United States and Soviet forces, perhaps initially limited, but carrying a very high risk of escalation to a nuclear catastrophe . Aggressive United States military action .
 JFK’s refusal to Americanise the war in Vietnam was wise . We know for certain that JFK's refusal to USise the Vietnam war was wise. We are happy to see that .
 Kennedy's successor, Lyndon B Johnson, retained virtually the entire team of national security advisers assembled by Kennedy . Johnson gave Johnson the same hawkish advice they had given Kennedy, who had given them .
 They urged him to intervene, to save the Saigon government from collapse and maintain America’s credibility with its allies . No matter how corrupt or incompetent the South Vietnamese government had become, the U.S. would intervene .
 Unlike JFK, LBJ caved in to his inherited hawks again and again as he Americanised the conflict in Vietnam . LBJ: "Unlike JFK, unlike JFK, he caved" in the war effort .
 JFK lacked JFK’s cautionary impulse and steely determination to stand up to misplaced hawkish advice . The result was a costly and humiliating defeat for the U.S. President.
 In a paper published in Foreign Policy in 2006, “Why Hawks Win”, the Nobel Prize-winning psychologist and economist Daniel Kahneman documented a number of biases in political decision-making that raise the odds of going to war rather than keeping the peace .
 Kahneman and Renshon say the findings are consistent across the more than 40 studies they reviewed . The findings were consistent across 40 studies, they say .
 JFK’s decisionmaking profile on matters of war and peace deviates spectacularly from this rule . It is the inverse of what is to be expected, based on the research of Kahneman, Renshon and their associates . But we now know .
 JFK repeatedly resisted his hawks, often at considerable political risk and cost . JFK's hawks were often at greater political risk, and cost.
 The president vowed in his inaugural address to “pay any price, bear any burden” to fight for liberty around the world . He was no pacifist, having fought and nearly died in the Second World War .
 Some of his anticommunist rhetoric and his behind-the-scenes decision-making is immense . But the gap between some of his anti-Russian rhetoric and some of the behind-scenes decisions is immense.
 JFK refused to believe the rosy estimates and predictions of his hawkish advisers . The hawks came to regard him as basically irrational – as a leader who refused to give the go-ahead to their carefully constructed scenarios .
 JFK drove his hawkish advisers crazy. JFK drove them crazy. In dozens, perhaps hundreds, of such conversations . JFK drove the hawkish . advisers crazy .
 In every major crisis involving national security, he refused to abandon his scepticism . But in every major national security crisis involving the president, he remained sceptical .
 JFK knew in his viscera and from wartime experience that the essence of war is chaos, anarchy and loss of human control over events . JFK knew that human understanding is fallible and thin, and that what human beings believe is true is often delusional – self-serving, short-
 Two virtual variants suggest themselves for each of the four principal foreign policy challenges he would have faced in his second term, presuming he had won the election in 1964 .
 One variant presents a series of no-brainers, given his pattern of successful resistance to his hawks . The president's pattern of resistance to hawks is similar to that of his own .
 No surprise, he continues to resist his hawks in a second term . No surprise that he continues successfully to resist the hawks .
 In a second variant, one more open to debate, he not only resists the hawks, but also shifts fundamentally out of the cold war paradigm . In the other variant, he shifts fundamentally away from the Cold War paradigm .
 JFK would have continued to resist the U.S. war in Vietnam . JFK would not have supported the war .
 Even though the Saigon government, weak and corrupt, was destined for the dustbin of history, he would have resisted sending U.S. combat troops to Vietnam .
 JFK and Nikita Khrushchev were aware of the danger of the Cuban missile crisis . JFK was determined to prevent such confrontations from occurring in 1962 .
 JFK would have resisted those calling for the continued build-up of U.S. nuclear arsenals . JFK worked with Khrushchev to reverse the nuclear arms race, limiting and eliminating redundant warheads and delivery vehicles .
 He and Khrushchev might have succeeded in achieving very low numbers of weapons . But the time available to them for such a monumental task would have been limited .
 The president would have resisted calls for the U.S. to liquidate the Cuban Revolution by means of military force and instal a more Washingtonfriendly regime in Havana . President Obama would have rejected calls for a military solution .
 President Obama might have succeeded in working with Fidel Castro’s government to normalise relations between Washington and Havana .
 If JFK had survived Dallas, the world would probably have become a safer, more peaceful place . JFK served as U.S. president until January 1969 . JFK was assassinated in Dallas, Texas, in 1968 .
 It is even possible that the cold war would have been rolled back and headed for an amicable end by 1969 . The cold war was likely to have ended in 1969 .
 This conclusion has nothing to do with the myth of a Kennedy Camelot and everything to do . It's not a myth, it's a matter of respect for the historical facts, as they have become available .
 Morning Call is the New Statesman's essential guide to domestic and global politics . This morning's Morning Call offers the latest edition of our weekly political and social media updates .
 The New Statesman’s global affairs newsletter, The World Review, is published by the New York-based organisation World Resources, World Resources .
 The New Statesman launches a series of new bookings in the UK . It is the first of its kind to be published by the U.S. government in more than 30 years .
 Green Times The New Statesman’s weekly environment email on the politics, business and culture of the climate and nature crises in your inbox every Thursday . Green Times Green Times is a weekly feature of the Green Times .
 This Week in Business is a quick look at the week ahead in companies, markets, regulation and investment . It's a three-minute look at what's going on in the world's business .
 The Culture Edit is the Culture Edit's weekly culture newsletter – from books and art to memes – sent every Friday . Read the culture newsletter for the latest edition of our weekly Culture Edit .
 Weekly Highlights round-up of some of the best articles featured in the most recent issue of the New Statesman, sent each Saturday . Highlights include the latest edition of our weekly feature section .
 Ideas and Letters is a weekly newsletter showcasing the finest writing from the ideas section and the NS archive . Send your thoughts to iReport@dailymailonline.co.uk .
 Sign up to receive information regarding NS events, subscription offers & product updates . Sign up for NS events and offers .