 2008 Democratic vice-presidential nominee Senator Joe Biden predicted that within the first six months of an Obama administration the freshman president would be tested by a contrived international crisis . Biden predicts that within six months Obama will be tested .
 JFK handled earlier crises fostered that nearly disastrous nuclear confrontation . In fact, the poor way in which JFK handled the crisis fostered the crisis .
 In February 1961, JFK faced his first crisis in far away Laos, where a three-way civil war raged . JFK faced the crisis in February 1961 .
 Kennedy soon discovered that United States forces, structured for conventional warfare in Europe, would be logistically hamstrung fighting hundreds of miles inland in the land-locked, mountainous jungle kingdom .
 Kennedy administration acquiesced in the neutralization of Laos in July 1962 . In July 1962, the Kennedy administration agreed to neutralize Laos .
 Kennedy then decided to “draw a line in the sand” in nearby South Vietnam . U.S. forces would benefit from large ports and numerous airfields, he said .
 JFK placed the nation on the slippery slope into a Vietnam quagmire . The nation is now embroiled in a war with the U.S. in Vietnam .
 A rag-tag army of 1,200 Cuban refugees, trained by the CIA and supported by B-26 bombers in Cuban markings, failed disastrously . They were flown from a secret base in Guatemala by Alabama Air National Guard members .
 Fidel Castro personally led forces that overwhelmed the Cuban patriots . U.S. Navy fighter planes orbited just outside Cuban airspace, anxiously awaiting orders to strike .
 That summer, at their first summit meeting in Vienna, Nikita Khrushchev threatened Kennedy with war over Berlin . The Soviet Premier threatened Kennedy . The two nations met for the first time in the summer .
 Kennedy returned home to order a massive buildup of U.S. strategic and conventional forces . A shaken Kennedy ordered a massive build-up of military forces . Kennedy was shaken by the events .
 A confident Khrushchev ordered a wall built to seal off communist East Berlin and East Germany . The wall was built in the 1950s and 1960s .
 JFK ordered plans for a nuclear first strike on Soviet bomber and missile bases . That same summer, JFK also ordered plans to strike Soviet aircraft bases .
 Plan called for 55 B-52s to drop 80 nuclear weapons . Plan wiped out estimated 90 percent of Soviet nuclear forces . Plan was designed to wipe out 90% of Soviet forces .
 planners estimated fewer than a million Russian casualties and deemed Soviet retaliation unlikely . Because these bases were located in isolated regions, planners estimate fewer than 1 million casualties . Soviet nuclear forces would be drastically reduced .
 Khrushchev deployed medium-range, nuclear-tipped missiles and light bombers to Cuba, threatening nuclear annihilation for every U.S. city within 1,500 miles . JFK tested JFK’s mettle and found weakness .
 Senator Obama, I grew up admiring John F Kennedy, and you’re no John Kennedy, says Obama . Senator Obama is no Kennedy, he says, and he's no Kennedy .
 JFK increased defense expenditures by a third in his first year in office . JFK increased the defense budget in his second year of office .
 By contrast with JFK’s commitment to “go anywhere, bear any burden,” Obama vows retreat and withdrawal within 16 months from a war that is winning in Iraq .
 Any nation seeking unconditional negotiations assumes a position of weakness, says U.S. President Barack Obama . Obama has been criticized for his stance on Syria .
 The Soviet challenge in Cuba occurred when the United States possessed overwhelming nuclear superiority . The U.S. had overwhelming power over Cuba .
 JFK rebuilt U.S. conventional forces, including expanding the Army from 16 to 20 divisions . JFK also expanded the Army's number of divisions to 20 .
 Obama proposes deep cuts in the U.S. military while Russia and China engage in massive military modernization . Iran moves inexorably toward acquiring nukes; Russia, Cuba, Venezuelan, and Iranian leaders become increasingly chummy .
 Herbert Hoover, not Franklin Roosevelt, occupied that office in 1929 when television was 10 years into the future . Hoover occupied the office 10 years before television was a reality TV in 1929 .
 An advisor on foreign policy must know Hezbollah is stronger in southern Lebanon today than in 2006 . French monitoring forces under a U.N. mandate can only ogle—not interfere with—Hezbollah operations .
 Former Air Force intelligence officer and former Director of Research for the U.S. Army’s Strategic Studies Institute, Dr. Dr. John Sutter is a former Air Force Intelligence Officer . Dr. Sutter says he is now retired from the Air Force .