 For the same reasons, the crisis is the least likely case for domestic politics affecting foreign policy . The crisis is likely to be less likely for foreign policy affecting domestic politics .
 Public opinion and interest group activity played a role in U.S. government policy choices that has not formerly been appreciated . Public opinion was generally supportive of the blockade option .
 The discussion of the crisis by ExComm members shows awareness of and sensitivity to domestic political considerations . The selection of the initial U.S. response to the Soviet missiles was made by the committee .
 Evidence of events outside the ExComm supportsthe contentionthat domestic political concerns shaped Cuba's decision making . Evidence supports the contention that domestic politics shaped Cuba decision making.
 If such considerationsintrudedupon decisionmakingthen,treatingtheirimportanceas moregeneralis reasonable . If such consideration is not considered, it's reasonable to treat such considerations as more general .
 Scholars continue to be fascinated by the Cuban missile crisis, and for good reason . The crisis occurred in the 1960s and '90s, when the U.S. tested a nuclear missile system .
 The U.S. side of the story is documented in extraordinary detail .
 The ExComm tapes, now almost completely declassified and published, are the jewel in this documentarycrown . The wealth of other material that has also become available means that our understanding of events inside and outside of the ExComm is far more complete than it was 20 or 25 years ago
 New materials suggest domestic politics played a more important role in foreign policy making than heretofore suspected . The release of additional material often leads to new understandings .
 This in turn directs us to evidence that has been available all along but has not previously been viewed as relevant to understanding United States decision making . This is in turn directed by evidence that was previously seen as relevant but not relevant .
 I am gratefulto seminarparticipantsand to AlexanderGeorge, JamesNathan, Eric Mlyn, Peter Feaver, PeterFeaver,James Nathan, Michael Hunt, FrankZagare, and Michael Hunt . Paul Sigmund for his help in facilitating an important interview
 Allison's account has long defined the terms of the discussion about organizational factors in the missile crisis and in U.S. foreign policy making overall . Allison: Cuba as ""Least Likely Case"" for the Importance of Domestic Politics .
 Of particular interest is his use of the missile crisis as a ""least likely case"" for a bureaucratic politics model of foreign policy decision making . Of particularinterest is his . use of missile crisis .
 Domestic politics have been generally thought to have affected the U.S.'s behavior by providing a generalized incitement to the Kennedy administration to ""do something"" about Cuba and the Soviet missiles .
 The blockade as a means of inducing the removal of the Soviet missiles possessed obvious strategic and domestic political limitations . Observers during and after the crisis had no trouble in identifying the limitations .
 The blockade did not prevent the installation of the missiles or their use against the U.S. It nearly prevented the arrival of some missiles and warheads . It did not impose serious costs on Castro or the Russians since it was not extended to cover petroleum, oil and lubricants .
 The Cubanmissiles could have triggered violence or even war between the U.S. and the Cubans or Soviets . It could have been at least as difficult to meet as the Soviet response would have been .
 The administration gave the Russians time to respond, the administration a respite from domestic criticism of its Cuba policy, and it was considerably less threatening to allies than the immediate use of force . It was otherwise not well suited to solving the administration's domestic political problems .
 If the missiles had not been removed, Kennedy would have faced a prolonged confrontation with no obvious end in sight or a substantial escalation in the level of coercion .
 The blockade option was a prominent option for the Kennedy administration, writes David Gergen . He argues that mass public opinion and interest group pressures conspired to render the blockade option an appealing option . Gergen: The crisis was not manufactured to suit partisan purposes .
 The selection of the blockade mainly by inhibiting the choice of initial responses that were either more or less forceful . Rather, the domestic political situation induced the blockade .
 Less forceful options would have generated sharp public criticism from hawkish Republicans and others . Leaving the internationalsituation aside, less forceful options .
 Public opinion would not have been as supportive of the White House as it was after the announcement of the blockade . Public opinion, which supported doing something before the discovery of the missiles, would have been more supportive of Obama administration .
 More forceful alternatives would not have generated criticism from those Republicans who desired to use force, but the level of public support for such alternatives would have been noticeably lower than that given to the blockade .
 The administration had to develop a strategy for "preparing" public opinion for this eventuality and begin to carry it out . The administration continued to consider the use of force .
 The White House has begun the political process in a way that would lose the least amount of political support for the administration . Doing so required initiating the public political process, the White House said .
 Some interest groups with an economic stake in the region lobbied for a blockade, but the available record reflects no lobbying in favor of the use of force . Interestgroup activity created a parallel set of constraints:interestedin eliminating Castroand Castroismfrom LatinAmerica .
 The White House has been under pressure to implement a blockade of the Keystone XL XL XL pipeline . The pipeline is expected to be the first phase of the border-to-border negotiations .
 Corporatecriticism of the administration's Cuba policy would at least temporarily stop . Corporatecriticism of the Obama administration's policy would be temporarilycease . The administration has been criticized for its Cuba policy .
 During the lull in critical commentary, the administration would have the opportunity to solidify a national consensus around the blockade and use the blockade to prepare public opinion for further responses .
 It would have been fruitless to criticize the White House for not keeping the blockade in place longer . Although the blockade would end before the interest groups achieved the objectives they desired, after the Soviet capitulationon the missiles, it would be fruitless .
 Once the crisis had died down, the same political group had been critical of Kennedy's Cuba policy before October 1962 resumed their criticism of the policy . However, after the crisis, they resumed criticizing Kennedy's policy .
 Arguing for the importance of public opinion and interest group activity is a commonplace in studies of domestic politics and foreign economic policy making . Arguing is commonplace in domestic politics .
 The Cuban Missile Crisis and Politics as Usual 73 international politics . Despite the recent growth in interest in the domestic politics of The CubanMissile Crisis . The claim is more unusual in studies of national security politics .
 This supposedly happens because top officials want to exert close control over government activity . This is because they want especially close secrecy . Top officials reportedly want especially secrecy .
 Public opinion is thoughtto matter only because of the commitment to governmentofficials in parliamentary democracies of publicly taking a bargaining position . Public opinion matters because of commitment to the commitment of government officials to public opinion .
 Public preferences may shape the choice of demands, threats, promises, or promises, it has been argued . However, such an argument leaves unexplored the question of whether substantivepreferences of the public serve to shape the choices of demands and promises .
 The newly available empirical record suggests that such views are at best incomplete and, in important ways, simply incorrect . New evidence suggests that the view is incorrect .
 One problem with the Paterson-Brophy thesis that domestic politics demandedonly that Kennedy ""do something"" is that it neglects supportamong the general public for the specific response of a blockade, comparedto supportfor other specific actions .
 The use of force tends to blunt any ""rally""effect in public opinion occasioned by the onset of crisis, particularly when casualties are sustained . This is consistent with James, Rioux, and Hristoulas' statistical analysis of presidential approvalratings over the entire 1953-
 Kennedy's popularity in the autumn of 1962 was lower than at any previous point in his presidency . Kennedy and his administration had particularreasonto be attentive to these reports .
 Given the pronouncedpublic support for the blockade compared to more violent options, the blockade was the ideal response in terms of gratifying public opinion . The blockade was an ideal response to a rising tide of public support .
 The White House attempted to shape public opinion by its specific responses to the crisis . The Cuban Missile Crisis and Politics as Usual 75 "Preparing"
 In this view, implementing the blockade option first would serve to acclimate the public to elevated tension levels . The blockade option would serve as an acclimatation for the public, the author says .
 The new high-tension status quo would mean that any move to a higher level of tension or violence would be less of a loss . Any movement back to the old status quo is actually a gain, and any movement back is a gain .
 ExComm discussions of public opinion are never so explicit that one can determine whether the actors actually thought in terms of either process . There is enough evidence of the importanceattachedto ""preparing" public opinion to treat it as a factor contributing to the choice of the blockade .
 The U.S. destroyed Soviet missiles, but it was a signal to domestic and foreign audiences of American government intent . The missile strike was destroyed by the Soviet Union, but the missile strike would have been a major success .
 If the U.S. government were prepared to incur the costs and risks associated with an air strike, it would be more difficult to doubt that it would face the costs associated with invading Cuba . Even a surgical strike, even a surgical one, would be difficult to imagine .
 If the U.S. were prepared to run the risks involved in a blockade, then it would be viewed as more likely to run other risks as well . By extension, if the United States were willing to run risks, it would also be more likely not to run a blockade .
 If the blockade now seems to have been a militarily innocuous act, that perspective is only the result of hindsight about an operation that did not lead to casualties . The blockade was not a military operation that led to casualties, but it was a military effort that didn't lead to any casualties
 The risk of the blockade was perceived by many to be close to the risk level associated with invasion . The willingness of the administrationto undertakethe former strengthened the credibility of its implicit threat to the latter, the author says .
 The president mused about the impact of his handling of the crisis on the 1962 elections . His ExComm comments about his forthcoming public speech on the missiles suggest that his immediate objective was to use public statements to rally public opinion .
 Kennedy and Rusk discussed the trade-off between the military advantages of an unannounced strike and the political advantages of beginning with a public presentation .
 Rusk suggests that any course of action involves heavy political involvement . Rusk suggested that any of the possible courses involve heavy involvement in the military .
 "It's going to affect all sorts of policies, positions, as well as the strategic situation," says President Obama . "It will affect all of the policies and positions," he says .
 "There's no such thing as a nonpolitical course of action. So I don't think there's any such thing," he says . "I'm not sure if I'm going to be able to make a difference in the world," he adds .
 I completely agree that there isn't any doubt that if we announcedthat there were MRBM sites going up that that would change, that it would change . And the fact that we indicatedour desire to restrain,this really would put the burdenon the Soviets .
 "We lose all the advantages of our strike. On the otherhand, the very fact of doing that makes the military ... lose the advantages," says President Obama .
 "If we announcethat it's there, then it's quite obvious to them that we're goninaprobablydo something about it, I would assume"
 Neither Kennedy nor Rusk mentioned exactly how public statements would have this effect . Both took it for granted that the effect could be induced and that it would be valuable .
 I think also that we have an almost unmanageableproblemin this countrygetting any support for a foreign policy that would assume we are going to sustain the cause of independence of states here and in all parts of the world . I think we have also a problem that is almost unman
 We've got foreign-aid programs. We've had foreign aid programs. Foreign aid programs are on the making in every continent, Obama says .
 President Obama says inaction in this situation would undermine the long support we need for foreign policy . He says inaction would undermine support for the kind of foreign policy that will eventually ensure our survival .
 President Kennedy thought he had to do something before photos of missile sites leaked to Congress and then to the public . President Kennedy also thought he needed to act before the photos leaked, he says .
 The U.S. government had gone on record as saying that it would act if the Soviets deployed offensive missiles in Cuba . ExComm participants say the U. S. government would act in response to the threat .
 There was general agreement that diplomatic protest or acquiescence did not suffice . The most drastic view was George Ball's, who believed that ""act""was understood to mean ""militaryaction, period"")
 The president wished to move public opinion to a consensus around his program and to avoid creating a situation where it would appear that he was merely 78 TimothyJ McKeown being swept along by domestic events .
 If he started with a weaker action than the blockade and then was criticized for timidity, any subsequent action would be taken under domestic political pressure . Any subsequent stronger action would come under domestic pressure, he says .
 This would be highly costly to the White House not only in bargaining with the Soviets, but in coping with the domestic situation . That would suggest that the administration was reluctant to take many risks with Khrushchev in the absence of such pressure .
 Beginning with a stronger action that would not be subject to much public criticismmeantthat Kennedycould escalatewithout appearing to be pushed into doing so .
 Prior analyses of the domestic politics of the crisis have generally been predicated on the assumption that evidence on the point could be found in the ExComm records . Interest groups and the Blockade Option Business Groups and Events beyond the Excomm .
 Analysts have begun to attend to evidence that points toward a different focus for consideration of domestic political factors in U.S. government decision making during crisis .
 Evidence suggests that ExComm members were aware of discussions taking place outside of the ExComm . When read in the light of other available evidence, it suggests that such discussions were taking place, but that they were doing so outside of .
 Dillon stated that he never heard from the ExComm about public opinion at the 1987 Hawk's Cay conference . Dillon: I never heard any comment about how our choices would fly politically .
 "That wasn't ourjob. Obviously, every President has to consider that sort of thing, but that wasn't ours," he said .
 Bob McNamara: "That wasn't our role, and we didn't discuss it. Maybe the Attorney General paid a certain amount of attention to that, because he was so close to his brother"
 One can read hundredsof pages of declassified National Security Council documents without encountering allusion to domestic politics .
 Anderson suggests that there is a norm in foreign policy-making bodies like the NSC that militates against mentioning domestic political matters . If so, it would appear that the norm was becoming frayed under the pressure of the crisis .
 George Ball, Robert McNamara, Douglas Dillon, Dean Rusk, unidentified participants,and the Presidenthimself . An awareness of the domestic political stakes was general .
 The second reason not to be satisfied with the examination of the ExComm transcriptsis related to our new understanding of the degree of anticipation of the crisis, is our understanding of how the crisis will unfold .
 If actors anticipate an outcome, they can exert themselves to change others' behavior . The others act, they will exert themselves, and the others act . If you anticipate a certain outcome, you can exert yourself to change it .
 If we have evidence that influence attempts were made just prior to the crisis, it would be reasonable to infer that decision makers still remembered them . If there is evidence of influence attempts, decision makers should remember them, he says .
 Governmentbehavior in the crisis could have been affected by them. Thus, governmentbehavior could have affected them .
 Most thought blockade was an excellent idea, although some wanted stronger action . A few thought the crisis was partly manufactured, some thought it was manufactured .
 Such reactions are hardlysurprising,and they do not differ substantially from the reactions of the general public . Such reactions were hardly surprising,and are hardly unsurprising .
 The consensus that the Wall Street Journal observed the morning after Kennedy's speech existed before the public announcement of the missiles . What is more significant about business opinion and U.S. behavior in this crisis is evidence that the consensus existed before .
 The U.S. government is under pressure to implement a blockade of North Korea . The blockade is the result of a consensus in Congress that the blockade is possible .
 In 1962, the American business community was becoming increasingly restive over the Kennedy administration's Latin American policy . The Kennedy administration was being criticized for its policies .
 A U.S. attack on missile sites might trigger overthrow of government by Communists in Latin America, officials say . Officials concerned about slow pace of private investment in the region .
 Senators Hubert Humphrey and Jacob Javits called an off-the-record meeting at the Army-Navy Club in Washington, DC, in 1962 . The meeting was attended by more than two dozen business and trade association executives .
 The lack of confidence by the business community in Latin America began with the Cuban affair and with the failure of the United States to take decisive action in protecting U.S. investors .
 Senator Javits asked what course of action he would recommend in regard to Cuba . Sargent strongly recommended that the U.S. begin by initiating a naval blockade .
 The record of the meeting does not contain any remarksthathatcontested Mr Sargent's views .
 President Obama met with Cuban leaders in Cuba last week . Cuba has not responded to the meeting, nor did any of them criticize the meeting .
 Many of these firms were quite important in American economic and political life . Many of them were important firms in American history .
 Of the 23 firms represented, 14 were ranked in Fortune rosters of the top firms in the United States for 1966 .
 Otherevidence suggests that these views were representative of business opinion . Othereiidence suggests therevidence that suggests thatthese views are representative of opinion .
 Business complaints about Cuba were commonplace in the summer of 1962 . The White House and Commerce Department held hearings on Cuba in 1962 .
 If Austen-Smith's theory of lobbying is correct, business leaders would be more willing to devote effort to lobbying those with whom they shared the greatest ideological affinity . Business leaders would spend more time lobbying those who shared ideological affinity with them .
 It would make sense for businesses to lobby Republicans in Congress more heavily than Democrats in the administration .
 Evidence suggests that hawkish business views on Cuba were widely held in the period before the discovery of the missiles were brought directly to the President's attention .
 The comment is significant because any campaignmeeting between the President and his business supporters would have had to occur prior to the public 4Telephone interview,Jack Behrman,21 February1996 and interview,Ralph Dungan, 24 January 1997 .
 Loeb, Rhoades in the early 1960s was active in LatinAmerica . The Loeb family also had a stake in the Cuban sugar industry .
 The Kennedy administration was being lobbied by elements of the business community in 1962 to take action against Cuba . The government was being pressured to act against the government of Cuba .
 In at least one case, the lobbying was a more specific plea for a blockade . The lobbying was more specific .
 This does not mean that the blockade was a simple-minded response to corporate pressure . The administration might well have acted in the absence of such pressure .
 The blockade was not implemented with the objective of securing compensation for American investors . It was ended before such compensation was secured, suggesting it was not a response to corporatearm-twisting .
 Business interests and more generalized demands to ""do something""could have had more subtle effects . Business interests may have been behind the blockade .
 First, it could have directed or re-directed the attention of central decision makersto the problem of what to do about Cuba, if not to the specific option of the blockade .
 The quotation is immediately preceded by a discussion of congressional sentiment . The quote is followed by discussion of Congress' sentiment .
 Foreign aid spending is the chief foreign policy problem, says Obama administration . It was always less than those who named foreign aid spending as the top foreign policy issue .
 The acceptance by business interests of measures that might have negative short-runeffects on business confidence would also allow the administration to initiate the process of leading public opinion to a position of support for stronger action .
 Zaller's model suggests that in the presence of elite consensus, public opinion formation can be understood in terms of a ""single voice"" process in which the most politically ""aware""become the strongest supporter of elite policy initiatives .
 Brody's examination of the so-called ""rally 'roundthe flag effect" concludes that whetherpublic opinion moves to greatersupportof the presidentafter a newsworthy event is heavily dependent upon whetheropinion leader comment that is critical of the president'sconduct appears in
 Analysis of press coverage of the Cuban issue finds that the period after the public announcement of the embargo saw the virtual disappearance of dissident views from leading newspapers .
 Strong business support for Kennedy's chosen course of action is consistent with this outcome . Business support for the blockade helps to explain his willingness to implement a blockade, he says .
 Allison examined the missile crisis partly because it seemed a ""least likely case"" for bureaucraticprocesses affecting decision making . Conclusion ""All Administrationscare less and know less about the Soviets than the domestic political situation.""-Arnold Horelick 84 TimothyJ McKeown
 The combination of severe threat, strong time pressure and great surprise would so engage the attention and energies of top decision makers that any bureaucratic resistance would be quickly overcome . The combined threat would be so strong it would engage the . attention of top . decision makers .
 Cuba is a least likely case for the influence of domestic politics on foreign policy making . Cuba is the least likely to be a case for domestic politics to influence foreign policy decision making .
 If the nation is on the edge of thermonuclear war and time is short, perhaps that is one situation in which the day-to-day concerns of a presidential administration would be set aside in order to concentrate on the strategic situation .
 The Kennedy White House's interest in the results of polls asking about specific responses to Castro . Interest group lobbying for a strong U.S. response to Castro suggests how commonplace these domestic political phenomena are . The missile crisis is the least likely case for the importance of public opinion and interest groups
 The ExCommmeetings and the rest of the crisis are superimposed uponpolitics as usual, but politics as usual do not vanish . The Ex-Commmememechings andthe rest of . the . rest of of the . crisis is superimposed on the crisis .
 As Richter shows, an analogous set of considerations was at work on the Soviet side .
 There is no reason to treat the set of incentives and pressures confronting the Kennedy administration's decision making regarding the blockade as unique . The Kennedy administration faced a unique set of challenges, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 Evidence presented does not suggest that strategic concerns were irrelevant or that domestic politics is ""more important"" than those concerns . But it does suggest that any theory of U.S. foreign policy decision making is inadequate .
 The Kennedy administration considered how domestic politics constrained them, but how they might be able to alter or transcend those constraints . Of particular interest is the evidence that the Kennedy administration thought about how to alter the climate of opinion in the U.S.
 This suggests that the United States Executive need not function merely as a price-taker with respect to domestic politics, passively accepting the constraintsthat it imposes, but rather has some capacity to act strategically . The U.S. Executive can relax or design around those constraints, the author says
 This case also has implications for how the documentaryrecord of foreign policy decision making is used in analyzing decisions .
 Ourunderstandingof interestgroup activity on foreign policy also ought to be reconsidered . Our understanding of interest groups' role in foreign policy is also being reconsidered.
 Interest groups are involved in seeking to influence foreign policy outcomes in domains where their privatepecuniary gains are directly at stake . There is little disagreement that interest groups are trying to influence policy outcomes .
 Tradepolicy, for example, has long been understood to be shaped by interest group pressures . Tradepolicies have been shaped by the pressures of interest groups on policy .
 Business interest groups lobbying for government actions that have only a probabilisticand indirectrelationship to their private gains . Business groups are seen to be lobbying for the public good of improving the Latin American investment climate .
 If firms seek government actions that are relatively weakly connected to their private pecuniary gain, then we can expect firms to seek other foreign policy actions that do not at first glance seem to have a close tie to interest group welfare .
 It will be interesting to see if this predictionholds up when other non-obvious domains are more closely examined for evidence of interest group involvement .
 Predicting International Conflict with Mass Media Indicators . Getting to War with Mass media Indicators. How to get to War? Get to War!
 James, Patrick,Jean Sebastien Rioux, and Athanasios Hristoulas. The CubanMissile Crisis and Politics as Usual 87.98.98 . The Cuban missile crisis and politics as usual 87 .
 Aggressiveness, involvement, and commitment to foreign policy attitudes. The U.S. has a long history of foreign policy .
 A heuristic is a heuristic for judging frequency and probability . In Jutdgment: A heuristics and Biases, ed. Heuristics .