 The paper will argue that the actual response of the Menzies government, as distinct from its public pronouncements, was constrained rather than unconditional, and shaped by strategic calculations of Australian interests . The paper argues that the government's actual response was constrained, considered rather than reflexive, and
 A strong relationship with the U.S. has remained a pivotal plank in Australian foreign policy . From the arrival of the Great White Fleet in 1908 to the stationing of American marines in Darwin in 2012, the relationship has remained strong . The relationship has been a key plank of Australian foreign
 The relationship assumed critical importance during the early Cold War . The capacity of the United Kingdom to assist Australia’s defence in the ‘Far East’ shrank during the Cold War, when the capacity .
 The signing of the ANZUS Treaty over sixty years ago formalised the Australian-American alliance . The hosting of joint intelligence and communication facilities cemented it . The ANZU Treaty was signed over 60 years ago .
 This paper argues that just like Australian involvement in Vietnam, public expressions of unwavering support for the U.S. were juggled with advancement of national interest . It argues that, just like . Australia's involvement in . Vietnam, Australia’s support for . the US was jugg
 Support for the American position on Cuba was circumscribed and closely linked to regional concerns . Furthermore, it argues that support for the U.S. position on the Cuban island was closely tied to regional issues .
 Canberra’s response to the crisis has also escaped scholarly attention, with the exceptions of Prue Torney-Parlicki and Gordon Greenwood . More significantly, Canberra's response to this crisis also escaped academic attention .
 Torney-Parlicki’s emphasis centres on the claim that comments made about the crisis by Australian Broadcasting Corporation journalist, Peter Russo, in December 1962, facilitated anti-American sentiment .
 Neither scholar focuses on the government’s reaction to the crisis itself and the anxieties and dependencies that shaped its policy . Instead, they focus on the anxiety and anxieties that shaped the policy .
 Neither provides any analysis of Australia-American relations in 1962, in the way that, for example, Asa McKercher has recently discussed in connection with Canada .
 This collection of essays contributes much to the revision of such orthodox views . The essays contribute much to revision of the views of some of the world's most influential thinkers .
 Instead of “all the way” with the United States, the Menzies government actively sought involvement in Vietnam . It was looking for a way in, not a way out of Vietnam, says historian John Avlon .
 "We have instructed our own ambassador to the to do all in his power to support the passing of this resolution," says the British ambassador .
 We do not underestimate the gravity the situation, a gravity profoundly demonstrated by both the tone and substance of the President’s broadcast . Indeed, the whole matter will serve to test whether the Soviet Union's constant advocacy of peace possesses either sincerity or substance . The matter will also test whether
 The Australian government’s public pledge of support to its most important ally was predictable . Given that the United States and its neighbours faced, as Menzies noted, “a very grave threat at close quarters”,12 .
 A closer examination, however, reveals the calculated nature of this pledge of support . "A closer examination of the pledges of support will reveal the true extent of this support," says CNN.com .
 The government’s policy on the crisis was not a kneejerk reaction, but rather one that carefully considered Australia's national interests . The government's policy was not knee-jerk reactions, it was a carefully considered national interest .
 The American resolution called for the immediate dismantling and withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuban soil under UN supervision . The resolution calls for the withdrawal of weapons from Cuba .
 Following UN verification of weapons’ dismantling and withdrawal, it called for termination of quarantine . The quarantine was quarantined until the weapons were dismantled and withdrawn .
 It recommended that the United States and the Soviet Union confer on this threat to security and peace, and subsequently, report on this to the Security Council . The U.S. and Soviet Union should confer on the threat, it said .
 Arthur Calwell, MP, Leader of the Opposition, also addressed parliament . Arthur . Calwell was MP for the Labour Party .
 Menzies’ and Calwell’s statements were repeated in the Senate that afternoon by The Rt Hon. The R. Hon. Calwell, who was in the House of Representatives, said the comments were repeated .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, outward cablegram , Department of External Affairs to various embassies, 23 October 1962 . The cablegram was sent to embassies in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 It notified the Department of External Affairs in Canberra, which received its cablegram in the early hours of 23 October .
 The Embassy highlighted the atmosphere of urgency associated with Kennedy’s scheduled meetings with the National Security Council, Cabinet, and Congressional leaders of both political parties . American naval activities in the Caribbean were causing the press to speculate over action .
 A further cablegram from Donald J Munro, First Secretary to the Embassy, advised that along with heads of mission, he had been called to a meeting at the State Department, to be briefed on its subject matter .
 Munro, along with representatives of the United States’ allies, attended an intelligence briefing at the State Department . Around two hours later, Munro advised that he believed the subject was Cuba and its “offensive capability”
 State Department's Director of the State Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Roger Hilsman, detailed the nature of the Soviet threat and outlined the evidence in relation to the installations . Ball, and Ball, also detailed the evidence .
 Hilsman told representatives that the U.S. had no concrete evidence of nuclear warheads in Cuba . He said there was no evidence that the United States had any evidence of such weapons .
 The missiles would be pointless without nuclear warheads, he said . The US believed storage for them was under construction, he added . Nevertheless, he advised that the missiles were pointless .
 Munro privately enquired about the number of ballistic missile bases . Hilsman declined to disclose this information to Munro .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, inward cablegram , Australian Embassy, Washington, to DEA, 22 October 1962 . The cablegram was sent to the DEA from the Australian Embassy in Washington .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, inward cablegram , Australian High Commission, London, to DEA, 22 October 1962, part 1 .
 Munro to DEA, 22 October 1962, sent cablegrams to DEA . Munro sent cable to DEA from Munro's home in Washington, DC .
 The nature of the weapons was not defensive, but aggressive, says Woolcott . Ivanov and Lessiovski said Woolcott's account was "accurate beyond question" NAA: A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 3, record of conversation, Woolcott
 He reminded Menzies of his public statement a month earlier that ‘if at any time the Communist buildup in Cuba were to become an offensive military base of significant capacity for the Soviet Union, then this country would do whatever must be done’
 It enabled a representative of the Menzies Government to access evidence of the missile build-up, including the reconnaissance photographs . It provided the government with the most detailed information it possessed .
 The Menzies government possessed no more information than the general population . However, when it came to how the U.S. would respond to this situation, the government had no more info .
 Australia became aware of the crisis on the date on which it was made aware of it . The date is important for Australia to become aware of its involvement in the crisis .
 A closer examination reveals the true date, 29 October, which was noted on the final page . The date was actually 29 October .
 William C Battle interviewed by Dennis O’Brien, Charlottesville, Virginia, 2 March 1970; JFKOH-WCB-02 ; John F Kennedy Oral History collection; JFK Presidential Library. William C. Battle interviewed .
 It is likely that the briefing to which he referred was the one delivered to heads of mission by the State Department . Munro attended rather than the Ambassador, Howard Beale, who was on leave in Australia .
 Although the U.S. and UK were Australia’s closest allies, Australia did not share with them the ‘special relationship” they shared with each other . This confirms that, although the United States and . UK were . Australia's closest allies but did not . share
 Until the morning of the 23 October, the Menzies government was in the dark . Until the night of the morning, the government had not been able to find out .
 The government’s formulation of its policy was swift, but also measured . The government's formulation of this policy is swift but measured .
 This desire to secure an American military presence was shaped by anxieties over regional security . This desire was formed in the wake of concerns over regional instability .
 The real or perceived spread of communism in South-East Asia necessitated such ambitions . The articulation of such ambitions was embodied in Department of Defence policy .
 Defence Committee stated that “Australia cannot defend herself unaided against the military power of the communist nations” It was considered in Australia’s national interest to invest in collective defence arrangements, more than in its own military capacity .
 Barwick and Tange's position implied that Australia’s geostrategic interests could be met by hosting offensive American weapons and bases on its territory . The rights of the United States to do so would be supported .
 Australian endorsement of Soviet actions in Cuba to install offensive weapons and bases on the territory of its ally . However, this must not have affected its position on Cuba .
 Articulating this at such a volatile time would have brought the Menzies government’s support for its most powerful ally into question, and subsequently, the alliance on which Australia heavily relied . Articulation of this would have been a significant blow to the Australian government .
 Discussions throughout 1962 culminated in an agreement in 1963 to host the North West Cape communications station . This was followed in 1966 by the agreement to establish satellite intelligence facilities at Pine Gap .
 Tange to Harry, Forsyth, Dunn and Robertson, 23 October 1962 . A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, minute, minute .
 DEA later adopted the position that ‘stop and search’ of ships could be in conflict with doctrines of the freedom of the high seas, and may be challengeable under international law” The quarantine caused unease amongst officials in the Department of Prime Minister .
 Nimmo, Deputy Secretary to the Department, queried the implications, if any, with John Bunting, Secretary to both the Department and Cabinet . Mr Bunting said the implications would be discussed with the Secretary of the Department . Nimmo said: “The implications of the implications
 Nimmo speculated that the US may ask allies via NATO or the Organization of American States to provide ships . Nimmo also speculated that Australia too may be asked to contribute to the effort .
 Cabinet meeting of 23 October was the first item on the agenda of the Cabinet meeting . Cabinet expressed concern over Australia's participation in the quarantine .
 Menzies opened the discussion by reading aloud Kennedy's personal message and broadcast . Barwick dominated the discussion on the government’s response to the broadcast .
 The “Pacific blockade” is a term used in international law and is not a reference to the geographical area . Barwick urged that the issue be approached with “sound common sense” and cautioned against suggestions that tended to “over formalize” the Australian response
 When he returned to the meeting to present the statement, it was endorsed without amendment or further comment . When he presented the statement to present it, the statement was endorsed .
 In preparing Barwick for any initial parliamentary questions on this matter, Ralph Harry, First Assistant Secretary of the DEA, investigated the extent of Australia’s obligations . Ralph Harry is the DEA's first Assistant Secretary . Australia's obligations to the DEA have been investigated by the DEA .
 Last of the Mandarins ,55; and Percy Spender, Exercises in Diplomacy: The ANZUS Treaty and the Colombo Plan ,106 .
 Harry to Barwick, 23 October 1962. A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, memorandum on “Australian Obligations under the ANZUS Treaty in relation to the Cuban situation”, Harry to . Barwick . The Cuban situation was a
 Forsyth to Barwick, 25 October 1962, “Australian Treaty Commitments”,5.5. A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 3, DEA paper on “The Cuban Crisis” with annotations . Forsyth: “Fors
 An attack on a member state in North America or Europe would be considered “an attack against them all’.46 This exacerbated uncertainty over the level of support it was expected to provide to its Western allies if the crisis escalated .
 Departmental advice and comment indicates that the Menzies government’s policy on the crisis was not automatically formulated or a foregone conclusion, as the literature on the alliance would lead us to believe,47 . But it does explain the calculated nature of the government's response to the
 It is unclear whether the DEA's advice on 23 October regarding the legality of the quarantine reached Menzies prior to his parliamentary statement of the same day . It is plausible that the issue influenced government policy .
 By Menzies declaring Australia’s support for the American UN resolution, Australia sanctioned American actions which, should the resolution have passed, would have provided a legal foundation .
 What the Menzies government was not influenced by was the British government’s response to the crisis, it was not .
 McEwen had urged, in Cabinet, that such views be gleaned without delay . Australian Senior Officer to the DEA to obtain the British Cabinet’s reactions .
 Harry received a reply from Eastman an hour before Menzies addressed Parliament . Harry attempted to reply to Eastman but it was the middle of the night in London . He received no reply until that evening .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, record of telephone conversation, Harry to Eastman, 23 October 1962 . Harry to E. Eastman: "I love you, I love you. You love you."
 The Menzies government’s explicit statement of support for the American UN resolution indicates a renewed faith in the UN as a “forum for the pacific settlement of disputes” This is in contrast to both its earlier doubts over the efficacy of the UN in influencing world affairs
 Howard Beale felt that the negative experience Menzies gained from his involvement in the U2 Affair of May 1960 resulted in him having “no high opinion of that body as an impartial deliberative assembly’s . The relevant Cabinet Notebook does not confirm that Menz
 Menzies to Battle for Kennedy, 23 October 1962 . A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, part 1 of the Kennedy assassination .
 Menzies included with his message was his parliamentary statement given earlier that day . He included with the message was a parliamentary statement .
 DEA to Plimsoll, 23 October 1962, DEA sent out cablegrams . DEA cablegram A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, outward cablegram . DEA sent the cablegram to Plimssoll on October 23, 1962 .
 NAA: A1838, 262/12/8/1 parts 1-3, correspondence, various dates . Belgium, Canada, France, Ghana, Japan, Malaysia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, Poland, United Arab Republic, West Germany, and Yugoslavia .
 Menzies government believed that the attainment of such weapons and bases served its geostrategic interests, and further cemented the alliance . American bases and weapons on Australian soil were seen as key to the alliance's success .
 It was deemed in Australia's national interest to ensure that the crisis did not deflect American attention from Australia’s region . The crisis was deemed to be in the national interest of Australia, which is located in the region .
 From Australia’s perspective, diversion of such power elsewhere would have left it vulnerable to regional communist threats, and even limited war . From Australia's perspective, the diversion of . such . power elsewhere left Australia vulnerable to . regional . communist threats and even . war .
 Menzies’ parliamentary statement of 23 October was cabled to the U.S. State Department . The statement was sent to the United States State Department on 23 October . Menzie’s parliamentary statement is cabled .
 Deputy Director of the Office of Southwest Pacific Affairs, David Cuthell, expressed the State Department’s appreciation of Menzies’ statement and noted it “was the first one received” This comment, though, is misleading .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 1, paper on “Points for Public Presentation” with annotations with annotations (author and audience unknown; likely Harry or Forsyth to Barwick), 23 October 1962,2.3 October 1962 . Author and audience
 We did not propose to remain silent on a matter of this kind or to discharge our duty to discharge the duty to inform honourable members of the view taken by the Government .
 Menzies did not of course disclose that an attempt was made to contact Whitehall but failed .
 Labor Opposition inferred from Menzies' apparent alacrity an uncritical adherence to U.S. foreign policy . The Labor Opposition therefore inferred from the Labor Opposition .
 The belief, encouraged by the State Department, that Australia was the first state to endorse the U.S. position was mistaken, but it was a belief that has persisted .
 Insofar as managing the Australian-American alliance within the UN was concerned, Plimsoll gave some foreign officials a broader expression of Australian support than the Menzies government perhaps intended .
 62 Kennedy received Macmillan’s message at 3pm . Plimsoll was asked, if the present situation is similar to that of the 1960s .
 A1209, 1962/912 , telegram with annotations, Daily Telegraph to Prime Minister’s press office, 24 October 1962 . Telegram was sent to the Prime Minister's press office in 1962 .
 Plimsoll was instructed to do “all in his power” to support the American UN resolution . His comments depart from Canberra’s more cautious response .
 I agree with you that the situation is one which can only be improved by continuing to give firm support to the resolute stand taken by the United States. I agree, I agree .
 I had felt it important myself to make our public position from the beginning one of unequivocal support for the President. "I had felt . myself . I felt it . felt important myself, to make . the public position of the President," she said .
 It is difficult to ascertain the extent of Menzies' faith in Kennedy and his administration during the crisis . Apart from approval he gave to messages drafted on his behalf and delivery of his parliamentary statement, he did not personally make a significant contribution to Australia’s response .
 It was departmental officials who carried the burden of Australian foreign policy formulation and diplomacy during the crisis . Departmental officials were responsible for Australia's response to the crisis in Syria .
 Barwick noted that India, Ceylon and Burma had all received Soviet aid and had given assurances to the UN that they would not manufacture or house nuclear weapons .
 Menzies government would have considered more likely to have become Soviet satellite states . However, there were Asian countries — especially Indonesia — in closer proximity to Australia, which Menzie government would not have considered .
 Barwick's public reply did not convey the Menzies government’s private unease that some of its South-East Asian neighbours had similar desires, and may draw inspiration .
 The government was also concerned regarding the ramifications it might one day face if it hosted American bases and weapons . The government is also concerned about the ramifications of hosting American bases .
 This issue was vocalised by Soviet diplomats to the UN in a meeting between Richard A Woolcott, member of the Australian Delegation to UN, B Ivanov, Political Affairs Counsellor of the Soviet Permanent Mission .
 Woolcott responded by focusing on the undoing of the ‘delicate nuclear balance’ which had been maintained between the U.S. and the Soviet Union to date . Woolcott: “The balance” had been kept between the United States and Soviet Union .
 Menzies, again, pinned his faith in a UN solution . Plimsoll had been instructed “to further, by such means as are within his power, the success of 75” Cairns .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 3, record of conversation, Woolcott with Ivanov and Lessiovski, 25 October 1962 .
 The Parliament was about to adjourn for a week, hence the aspect to Cairns’ question regarding its recall . It appears from this that the government’s public expression of support was taken more broadly than intended .
 Kennedy’s comment that Australian support was “no surprise” implies that his administration believed such support would be axiomatic . Importantly, Kennedy's comment implies that he believes such support is axiomomomomatic .
 Australia had previously demonstrated that it could swiftly support American ventures elsewhere, especially its entry into the Korean War . Australia has previously shown that it can swiftly support U.S. ventures elsewhere .
 Kennedy may have overestimated the extent of Australia’s support for its actions . But Australia nonetheless met American expectations, and it did so more quickly, and with less evidence, than the United States provided to other allies .
 Bill Hayden (Labor, MHR Oxley) asked Menzies if Cuba had become “a strategic target of paramount importance” given the installation of nuclear missile bases, and whether U.S. actions to remove such bases were justified .
 I do not propose to speculate on the attitude of unnamed countries to the hypothetical situation of nuclear bases being established in this country at some time in the future, especially since I have 82 .
 Department offices overseas on possible ramifications of the crisis in South-East Asia . Department of State Department working on possible implications of crisis in region .
 DEA was concerned that China may see this as an opportunity “for testing the United States position in the Far East” and North Vietnam may “delay withdrawal of their forces still further and continue to obstruct inspection” regarding the Laotian settlement . The DEA was also concerned
 The first reply to this request for information has been received from the Australian High Commission in London . The High Commission has not responded to the request .
 When Australians went to bed on 28 October, the world was on the brink of thermonuclear war . When they awoke, the darkest days of the crisis appeared to be over .
 For Australia, the crisis seemed to have ended as quickly as it had begun . For Australia it seemed like the end of the crisis had come quickly enough .
 Time differences made it difficult for the government to maintain their grasp on the crisis as it unfolded . Time differences meant it was difficult for them to maintain a grasp of the crisis .
 Munro noted that Harriman’s reflections were in light of the crisis being resolved, as at that point, there was some progress towards a solution . Munro said that in the aftermath of that crisis, the crisis had been resolved .
 The DEA received a further cablegram from the Australian Embassy, Washington, which stated that Pierre Salinger, White House Press Secretary, had clarified that there were two messages from Khrushchev; was the perspective adopted by the Menzies government when Barwick addressed parliament .
 Barwick attributed the aversion of disaster to the “prompt and decisive action” of the US . Barwick credited the United States and its OAS partners for their cooperation over regional defence .
 The government's private concerns examined in this paper therefore place its public pledge of support in perspective . The government’s private concerns . examined in . this paper place its . public pledge to support in . perspective .
 A1838, 262/12/8/1 part 2, inward cablegram , Plimsoll to DEA, 27 October 1962, was sent to the DEA .
 Barwick, rather than Menzies, provided a summary of the key events in the crisis and detailed the government’s policy .