 Crisis de octubre ) in Cuba and the Caribbean crisis in the former USSR—was a 13-day confrontation in October 1962 between the Soviet Union and Cuba on one side and the United States .
 The crisis is generally regarded as the moment in which the Cold War came closest to turning into a nuclear conflict . It is the first documented instance of mutual assured destruction being discussed as a determining factor in a major international arms agreement .
 During a meeting between Khrushchev and Fidel Castro that July, a secret agreement was reached and construction of several missile sites began in the late summer . During the summer of that year, construction began .
 Defense Intelligence Agency tasked an Air Force-operated U-2 aircraft to scan the suspected areas in Cuba . The planes secured clear photographic evidence of medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic missiles .
 The United States considered attacking Cuba via air and sea, but decided on a military blockade instead . The U.S. called it a ""quarantine"" for legal and other reasons .
 Kennedy administration held only a slim hope that the Kremlin would agree to their demands . The Kennedy administration expected a military confrontation with the Kremlin .
 In secret back-channel communications the President and Premier initiated a proposal to resolve the crisis . The proposal was made in secret back channel communications .
 Several Soviet ships attempted to run the blockade, increasing tensions to the point that orders were sent out to United States Navy ships to fire warning shots and then open fire .
 On October 27, a U-2 plane was shot down by a Soviet missile crew . The action could have resulted in immediate retaliation from the Kennedy crisis cabinet, McNamara said .
 The confrontation ended on October 28, 1962, when Kennedy and U.N. Secretary-General U. Thant reached an agreement with Khrushchev . Kennedy and United Nations secretary-general U Thant agreed an agreement .
 The Soviets would dismantle their offensive weapons in Cuba and return them to the Soviet Union, subject to United Nations verification, in exchange for a U.S. public declaration and agreement never to invade Cuba . Publicly, the Soviets would return the weapons to the U.N. subject to
 U.S. agreed to dismantle all US-built Jupiter IRBMs, armed with nuclear warheads, which were deployed in Turkey and Italy against the Soviet Union . Secretly, the United States also agreed that it would dismantle all .
 The blockade was formally ended at 6:45 pm EST on November 20, 1962 . After the removal of missiles and Ilyushin Il-28 light bombers from Cuba, the blockade officially ended .
 The tense negotiations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union pointed out the necessity of a quick, clear and direct communication between Washington and Moscow . The tension between the United States and the . Soviet Union .
 A direct telephone link between the leaders of the two countries was established . As a result, a direct phone link was established between the two nations .
 Earlier actions by the United States . Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba . Cuba positioning . Missiles reported .
 Such an involvement would also defy the Monroe Doctrine, a U.S. policy limiting the United States' involvement with European colonies and European affairs . The Monroe Doctrine held that European powers should not have involvement with states in the Western Hemisphere .
 Khrushchev's impression was confirmed by the President's soft response during the Berlin Crisis of 1961 . United States covert operations continued in 1961 with the unsuccessful Operation Mongoose .
 In January 1962, General Edward Lansdale described plans to overthrow the Cuban Government in a top-secret report . The report was addressed to President Kennedy and officials involved with Operation Mongoose .
 By October 1962, they may have had a few dozen, although some intelligence estimates were as high as 75 . Some intelligence estimates say they had as many as 75 people in total .
 The United States had a very considerable advantage in total number of nuclear warheads at the time . The U.S. had a significant advantage in all the technologies needed to deliver them accurately, author says .
 USSR enjoyed a two-to-one advantage in conventional ground forces, much more pronounced in field guns and tanks . United States also led in missile defensive capabilities, Naval and Air power .
 He faced a strategic situation where the United States was perceived to have a ""splendid first strike"" capability against the Soviet Union . The U.S. believed to be able to strike against Soviet Russia .
 To meet the threat it faced in 1962, 1963, and 1964, it had very few options . But to meet the threats it faced, the government faced little options . The U.S. faced a similar situation in 1962 and 1963 .
 Khrushchev wanted to bring West Berlin into the Soviet orbit . The West Berlin zone was within Communist East Germany . The Soviet missiles were deployed to Cuba in order to protect the country .
 Khrushchev believed that if the U.S. did nothing over the missile deployments in Cuba, he could muscle the West out of Berlin using said missiles as a deterrent to western counter-measures in Berlin . He believed if the Americans did nothing, he would muscle the . West out
 If the Americans tried to bargain with the Soviets after becoming aware of the missiles, Khrushchev could demand trading the missiles for West Berlin .
 Khrushchev was reacting in part to the nuclear threat of obsolescent Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles which the United States had installed in Turkey during April 1962 . The U.S. had installed the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in April 1962 during April .
 From the very beginning, the Soviets' operation entailed elaborate denial and deception, known in the USSR as maskirovka . From the beginning of the Soviet Union's operation, the Soviet government used to deny its existence .
 Operation Anadyr was also the name of a river flowing into the Bering Sea and a bomber base in the far eastern region . The Soviet code name was also a river and a Bering River .
 In early 1962, a group of Soviet military and missile construction specialists accompanied an agricultural delegation to Havana . All these were meant to conceal the program from both internal and external audiences .
 Fidel Castro objected to missiles deployment that would have made him look like a Soviet puppet, but was persuaded that missiles in Cuba would be in the interests of the entire socialist camp . Specialists in missile construction under the guise of ""machine operators,"" ""irrigation specialists"" and ""
 The U.S. Congress approved United States Joint Resolution 230, which expressed its resolve to prevent the creation of an externally supported military establishment . Khrushchev said the missiles would be concealed and camouflaged by the palm trees .
 On the same day, the United States announced a major military exercise in the Caribbean, PHIBRIGLEX-62, which Cuba denounced as a deliberate provocation . Cuba denounced the exercise as proof that the U.S. planned to invade Cuba . The United States also announced a
 The Soviets continued their Maskirovka program to conceal their actions in Cuba . The program was used to conceal the actions of the Soviet Union .
 On October 13, Dobrynin was questioned by former Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles about whether the Soviets plan to put offensive weapons in Cuba . Bowles: "I don't think it's possible"
 As early as August 1962, the U.S. suspected the Soviets of building missile facilities in Cuba . Khrushchev told Kennedy that "under no circumstances" would surface-to-surface missiles be sent to Cuba .
 The R-12 was an intermediate-range ballistic missile capable of carrying a thermonuclear warhead . The missile was launched in the 1980s and 1990s .
 The missile could deliver a megaton-class nuclear weapon . It was a single-stage, road-transportable, surface-launched, storable liquid propellant fueled missile that could .
 The missiles in Cuba allowed the Soviets to effectively target almost the entire continental U.S. Missiles reported in Cuba . The missiles allowed the Soviet Union to effectively attack the continental United States .
 No U-2 flights were made over Cuba from September 5 until October 14 . Despite increasing evidence of a military build-up on Cuba, no U.2 flights over Cuba .
 A U-2 operated by the U.S. Air Force's Strategic Air Command flew over Sakhalin Island in the Soviet Far East by mistake . The first problem caused the pause in reconnaissance flights took place on August 30 .
 The Kennedy administration decided to try the new Corona KH series satellites in an attempt to obtain sufficient evidence . Therefore, the Kennedy administration .
 Corona spy satellite was kept ready for launch on 7 days' notice in case of an emergency launch . NRO's institution of ""R7"" status was created to keep a Corona satellite ready to launch on a 7-day notice .
 Cuban surface-to-air missile sites were arranged in a pattern similar to those used by the Soviet Union to protect its ICBM bases . At the end of September, Navy reconnaissance aircraft photographed the Soviet ship Kasimov with large crates on its deck the size and shape of Il-28
 Following CIA's unsuccessful mission over Soviet Union, it was thought that if another U-2 was shot down a cover story involving Air Force flights would be easier to explain than CIA flights .
 Weather kept the planes from flying . Weather prevented reconnaissance missions from being re-authorized .
 National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy waited until morning to tell the President . The CIA notified the Department of State and at 8:30 pm EDT, the National Security adviser said .
 The United States had no plan in place because U.S. intelligence had been convinced that the Soviets would never install nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.K. had no such a plan because intelligence believed the Soviets wouldn't install nuclear missile bases .
 Send a message to Castro to warn him of the grave danger he and Cuba are in . Send a video to Castro of the danger he is in .
 Joint Chiefs of Staff unanimously agreed that a full-scale attack and invasion was the only solution . Full force invasion of Cuba and overthrow of Castro was the solution to the Cuban crisis . Joint chiefs of Staff agreed that the only option was to attack .
 President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara in an EXCOMM meeting . Kennedy also believed that United States' allies would think of the United States as ""trigger-happy cowboys" who lost Berlin because of the situation .
 The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed that the missiles would seriously alter the military balance, but Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed .
 An extra forty, he reasoned, would make little difference to the overall strategic balance . An extra 40 per cent of the troops would be needed in order to maintain the balance of the country .
 As part of the blockade, the United States military was put on high alert to enforce the blockade and to be ready to invade Cuba at a moment's notice . The U.S. military was also put on a high alert .
 The 1st Armored Division was sent to Georgia, Georgia, and five army divisions were alerted for combat operations . Georgia was declared a state of martial law in 2003 .
 The Strategic Air Command distributed its shorter-ranged B-47 Stratojet medium bombers to civilian airports . The B-52 Stratofortress heavy bombers were sent aloft by the Air Force Command .
 U.S. Navy P-2H Neptune of VP-18 flying over Soviet cargo ship with crated Il-28s on deck during Cuban Crisis .
 Reservations about the plan continued to be voiced as late as the twenty-first; however, the paramount one was that once the blockade was put into effect, the Soviets would rush to complete some of the missiles .
 President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba at the Oval Office on October 23, 1962 . President Kennedy signed the proclamation in 1962 .
 Ambassadors around the world gave advance notice to non-Eastern Bloc leaders . Eastern Bloc countries were given advance notice of the invasion .
 President Kennedy delivered a nation-wide televised address on all of the major networks announcing the discovery of the missiles . All of the networks were supportive of the United States position .
 The heavy cruiser USS Newport News was designated flagship for the blockade . The USS Leary was the destroyer escort for the heavy cruiser .
 A cable drafted by George Ball to the United States Ambassador in Turkey and the U.S. Ambassador to NATO notified them that they were considering making an offer to withdraw missiles from Italy and Turkey in exchange for the Soviet withdrawal from Cuba . The cable was drafted by Ball .
 Turkish officials replied that they would ""deeply resent"" any trade for the U.S. missile's presence in their country . Turkish officials said they would "deeply resented" any trade with the United States .
 In West Germany, newspapers supported the U.S. response, contrasting it with the weak American actions in the region during the preceding months . West Germany's newspapers also supported the United States' response .
 Khrushchev warned that the United States' ""outright piracy"" would lead to war . At the time, the crisis continued unabated, and on the evening of October 24, the Soviet news agency TASS broadcast a telegram .
 Khrushchev sent a telegram to Kennedy which was received at 10:52 pm EDT . Said the Soviet Union views the blockade as ""an act of aggression" and their ships will be instructed to ignore it . However, this was followed at 9:24 pm EDT by Khrush
 Adlai Stevenson shows aerial photos of Cuban missiles to the United Nations . US alert level raised to the highest level of alert in Cuba .
 United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronted Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin in an emergency meeting of the SC challenging him to admit the existence of the missiles . Stevenson challenged the Soviet ambassador to the U.N. to admit that the missiles were possible .
 The B-47 medium bombers were dispersed to various military and civilian airfields, and made ready to take off, fully equipped, on 15 minutes' notice . For the only confirmed time in U.S. history, while the B-52 bombers went on continuous airborne alert, the
 Twenty-three nuclear-armed B-52s were sent to orbit points within striking distance of the Soviet Union . The U.S. sent them to orbit .
 Fomin noted, ""War seems about to break out"" and asked Scali to use his contacts to talk to his ""high-level friends" at the State Department to see if the U.S. would be interested in a diplomatic solution . Fomin said he would use his
 On October 26, President Kennedy was still leaning towards military action to eliminate the missiles in Cuba . Kennedy still believed to be leaning towards a military action against Cuba .
 Operation Mongoose planning in the Pentagon focused on using Cuban sabotage units to attack missile sites and on installing a government after an invasion . The Pentagon was planning to attack the missile sites in Cuba .
 Radio Moscow began broadcasting a message from Khrushchev on October 27 . They also noted that the Cuban military continued to organize for action, although they were under order not to initiate action unless attacked .
 At 10:00 am EDT, the executive committee met again to discuss the situation and came to the conclusion that the change in the message was due to internal debate between Khrushchev and other party officials in the Kremlin . Kennedy realized that he would be in an ""insupportable
 The missiles in Turkey were not militarily useful and were being removed anyway . The missiles are being removed from Turkey anyway .
 Italy's Prime Minister Fanfani offered to allow withdrawal of missiles deployed in Apulia as a bargaining chip . Italy's Foreign Minister offered to withdraw missiles as a 'bargain chip'
 The decision to fire the missile was made locally by an undetermined Soviet commander acting on his own authority . The stress in negotiations between the USSR and the United States intensified .
 EXCOMM meeting on October 29, 1962 held in the White House Cabinet Room during the Cuban missile crisis . ExCOMM met in the Cabinet Room at the time .
 President Kennedy is to the left of the American flag; on his left is Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . Secretary of State Dean Rusk is on the right side of the flag . On the left is President Kennedy; on the left, Defense Secretary McNamara and his right is Secretary
 Kennedy secretly agreed to remove all missiles set in southern Italy and in Turkey, the latter on the border of the Soviet Union, in exchange for Khrushchev removing all missiles in Cuba . At 9:00 am EST EST, on October 28, on Radio Moscow, a new message from
 The United States continued the blockade, and in the following days, aerial reconnaissance proved that the Soviets were making progress .
 At the time when the Kennedy administration thought that the Cuban missile crisis was resolved, nuclear tactical rockets stayed in Cuba . Nuclear tactical rockets were not part of the Kennedy-Khrushchev understandings .
 It is possible that Khrushchev only placed the missiles in Cuba to get Kennedy to remove them from Italy and Turkey . The Soviets had no intention of resorting to nuclear war if they were out-gunned by the Americans, says historian .
 The withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from NATO bases in Southern Italy and Turkey was not made public at the time . Khrushchev appeared to have lost the conflict and become weakened .
 Both Kennedy and Khrushchev took every step to avoid full conflict despite the pressures of their governments . This is not entirely the case as both sides avoided full conflict in the past .
 Cuba perceived the outcome as a partial betrayal by the Soviets, given that decisions on how to resolve the crisis had been made exclusively by Kennedy and Khrushchev .
 MATS Boeing C-135B Stratolifter delivering ammunition to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base stalled and crashed on approach on October 23 . Seven crew died when the plane crashed in the crash .
 Critics including Seymour Melman and Seymour Hersh suggested that the Cuban missile crisis encouraged U.S. use of military means such as in the Vietnam War .
 Historians believe Chinese attack against India for disputed land was meant to coincide with the Cuban missile crisis . This Soviet-American confrontation was synchronous with the Sino-Indian War .
 Historian Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., Jr., said Khrushchev pressured Castro to accept the missiles . Schlesingers said that Castro did not want the missiles, but that Khruschev pressured him to accept them .
 Schlesinger believed that when the missiles were withdrawn, Castro was angrier with Khrushchev than he was with Kennedy . The Cuban National Directorate of the Revolution accepted them to protect Cuba against United States attack, and to aid its ally .
 Khrushchev feared that Castro's hurt pride and widespread Cuban indignation over the concessions he had made to Kennedy might lead to a breakdown of the agreement between the Soviet Union and the U.S. The Soviet Union had made concessions to Kennedy .
 Khrushchev decided to make Cuba a special offer in order to prevent it from being sold . Cuba was made an offer to the Soviet Union in a bid to stop it from selling it .
 Khrushchev concluded that because the Americans hadn't listed the missiles on their list of demands, the Soviet Union's interests would be well served by keeping them in Cuba .
 The tactical nuclear weapons were crated and returned by sea to the Soviet Union in December 1962 . Castro was forced to give way and the weapons were returned by ship .
 Thirteen Days, Robert F Kennedy's account of the crisis, released in 1969 . The Missiles of October, 1974 TV docudrama about the crisis . The World Next Door, 1990 novel by Brad Ferguson, set in this period Quantum Leap, 1991 TV Show, Sam must deal
 Black Ops, 2010 video game, set during and after the Cuban missile crisis . Black Ops is based on the Cuban crisis . The game was released in 2010 .
 McNamara mistakenly dates the shooting down of USAF Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on October 26 . Armageddon 1962, a 2013 mockumentary, is based on the events in October 1962 .
 Archive of correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev during Cuban missile crisis . Kennedy and his Soviet Union had been involved in the Cuban crisis .
 Association of Former Intelligence Officers, August 12, 2011, published 5.05.15.25.35.35 . Association of Ex-Intelligence Officers, published by former intelligence officers, published in August 2011 .
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to the Cuban missile crisis . The crisis was the height of the Soviet Union's missile program .