 Analyse it critically . Write a comprehensive note on North Korea and weapons of mass destruction . Analyze it critically.
 102 Q.l6: Define globalisation. Also discuss the various kinds of diplomacy . Also discuss how to deal with the world's most powerful institutions .
 Discuss on the various aspects of globalisation.:.7..103-112 Q.7 Write a comprehensive note on Non-Aligned Movement.:.3-117 jv_
 It is both academic and public policy field, and can be either positive or normative as it seeks to analyze as well as formulate the foreign policy of particular states .
 It is often considered a branch of political science, but an important sector of academia prefer to treat it as an interdisciplinary field of study . It is also considered interdisciplinary by some academics .
 International Relations became a separate discipline in the early 20th century . Aspects of international relations have been studied for thousands of years since the time of Thucydides .
 International Relations draws upon such diverse fields as economics, history, international law, philosophy, geography, social work, sociology, anthropology, anthropology and psychology . International Relations is an international study of international relations .
 History of international relations can be traced thousands of years ago . Sumerian citystates, starting in 3,500 BC, were first fully-fledged international system .
 The history of international relations based on nation-states is often traced back to the Peace of Westphalia of 1648 . The modem state system was developed in 1648 in Germany .
 The European medieval organization of political authority was based on a vaguely hierarchical religious order . Prior to this, the European medieval . medieval . organization of . political authority . was . based on . a vaguely . hierarchical religious orders .
 Westphalia instituted the legal concept of sovereignty, that didn't exist in classical and medieval times . It essentially meant rulers had no internal equals within a defined territory and no external superiors as the ultimate authority within the territory's sovereign borders .
 Westphalia encouraged the rise of the independent nation-state, the institutionalization of diplomacy and armies . The state of Germany was founded in 1783 .
 The contemporary international system was established through decolonization during the Cold War . Decolonization was the result of decolonialization during that period .
 The ability of contemporary International Relations discourse to explain the relations of these different types of states is disputed . The ability to explain these relations is disputed by some of the world's most powerful states .
 International Relations theory was not developed until after World War I . What is explicitly recognized as International Relations Theory was not formally recognized until after the war .
 International Relations theory, however, has a long tradition of drawing on the work of other social sciences . International relations theory has a history of drawing from other social science .
 The use of capitalizations of the ""I"" and ""R"" in International Relations aims to distinguish the academic discipline of International Relations from the phenomena of international relations . International Relations is an academic discipline that aims to separate academic and non-academic .
 Many cite Sun Tzu's The Art of War and Thucydides' History of the Peloponnesian War as the inspiration for realist theory . Hobbes' Leviathan and Machiavelli's The Prince provide further elaboration .
 Hugo Grotius and John Locke offered the first accounts of universal entitlement to certain rights on the basis of common humanity . Though contemporaiy human rights is considerably different than the type of rights envisioned under natural law .
 Marxism has been a foundation of international relations for the past century . In addition to contemporary theories of liberal internationalism, Marxism is a foundation for international relations . In the twentieth century, Marxist theories of internationalism have been influential in international diplomacy .
 International relations as a distinct field of study was almost entirely British-centered . Study of International Relations was originally a British focus .
 International Relations at U.S. universities and Geneva, Switzerland. This was rapidly followed by establishment of International Relations in Geneva .
 In the early 1920s, the London School of Economics' department of International Relations was founded at the behest of Nobel Peace Prize winner Philip Noel-Baker . The department of international relations was founded in the 1920s .
 The Graduate Institute of International Studies was founded in 1927 to form diplomats associated to the League of Nations, established in Geneva some years before . The first university entirely dedicated to the study of International Relations was the Graduate Institute .
 Graduate Institute of International Studies offered one of the first Ph.D. degrees in international relations . The Graduate Institute for International Studies was founded in 1903 .
 Concepts in international relations are important elements in decision making . The concept of freedom of action and equality is important elements of international relations .
 Decision makers must take into account the set of international conditions in taking initiatives that would create different types of responses . Decision makers should also take account of the international conditions, says CNN.com's John Defterios .
 International relations is often viewed in terms of levels of analysis . Systemic level concepts are often seen as complex concepts . International relations can be viewed as complex and complex systems .
 The systemic level concepts are those broad concepts that define and shape an international milieu, characterised by Anarchy . Anarchy is an organisation that defines and shapes the world of Anarchy. Anarchy is a society that is defined by anarchy .
 The concept of power in international relations can be described as the degree of resources, capabilities, and influence in international affairs . Power is defined by the degree, capabilities and influence of international relations .
 Hard power is often divided up into the concepts of hard power and soft power . Hard power relates primarily to coercive power, such as the use of force . Soft power commonly covers economics, diplomacy and cultural influence .
 There is no clear dividing line between the two forms of power, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com.com .
 Polarity in International Relations refers to the arrangement of power within the international system . Polarity is a form of power arrangement within the world's political system .
 The concept arose from bipolarity during the Cold War, with the international system dominated by the conflict between two superpowers, and has been applied retrospectively by theorists .
 Stalin said he saw the international system as a bipolar one with two opposing power bases and ideologies . However, the term bipolar was notably used by Stalin who saw the system as bipolar one .
 The international system prior to 1945 can be described as multi-polar, with power being shared among Great powers . Consequently, the international system before 1945 was described as 'multi polar'
 The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 had led to what some would call unipolarily, with the U.S. as a sole superpower . The collapse led to the United States as the sole superpower in the world .
 There is debate over whether China is now a superpower or a possible candidate in the future . However, due to China's continued rapid economic growth , combined with their respectable international position they hold within political spheres, there is debate .
 Several theories of international relations draw upon the idea of polarity . The idea is used as a basis for international relations theories .
 The balance of power was a concept prevalent in Europe prior to the First World War . The thought being that by balancing power blocs it would create stability and prevent war .
 Theories of the balance of power gained prominence again during the Cold War, being a central mechanism of Kenneth Waltz's Neorealism . Theories were central to the film's success .
 Hegemonic stability theory also draws upon the idea of Polarity, specifically the state of unipolarity . Polarity is a state of polarity, not unipolar .
 Hegemony is the preponderance of power at one pole in the international system . Theory argues this is a stable configuration because of mutual gains by both the dbminant power and others in the system .
 This is contrary to many Neorealist arguments, particularly made by Kenneth Waltz, stating that the state of unipolarity is an unstable configuration that will inevitably change . This is not the end of the Cold War or state of the unipolaripolarity .
 Power transition theory states that it is likely that a great power would challenge a hegemon after a certain period, resulting in a major war . This can be expressed in Power Transition theory .
 It suggests that while hegemony can control the occurrence of wars, it also results in the 4 _ International Relations creation of one .
 Organski, argued this based on the occurrence of previous wars during British, Portuguese and Dutch hegemony . Organskis argued that this was based on previous wars .
 Many advocate that the eurrent international system is characterized by growing interdependence . Interdependence is the mutual responsibility and dependency on others . The mutual responsibility is mutual responsibility .
 Advocates of globalization point to growing globalization, particularly with international economic interaction . Advocates say globalization is a form of interaction between nations and society .
 The role of international institutions, and widespread acceptance of a number of operating principles in the international system, reinforces ideas that relations are characterized by interdependenee .
 Dependency Dependency theory is a theory most commonly associated with Marxism . Theory states that a set of Core states exploit weaker Periphery states for their prosperity . Theory says that a Core state exploit a weaker state for its prosperity .
 Diplomacy is the practice of communication and negotiation between representatives of states . Diplomacy involves the practice and negotiation of diplomatic relations between states .
 To some extent, all other tools of international relations can be considered the failure of diplomacy . Diplomacy can be seen as a failure in diplomacy, says John Defterios .
 The use of other tools are part of the communication and negotiation inherent within diplomacy . Keeping in mind, the use of these tools is part of diplomacy .
 Sanctions, force, and adjusting trade regulations, while not typically considered part of diplomacy, are actually valuable tools in the interest of leverage and placement in negotiations . Sanctions and force are useful tools in trade negotiations .
 Sanctions are usually a first resort after the failure of diplomacy, and are one of the main tools used to enforce treaties . Sanctions have been used in the past to enforce international agreements .
 Sanctions can take the form of diplomatic or economic sanctions and involve the cutting of ties and imposition of barriers to communication or trade . They can be taken into account in the shape of diplomatic and economic sanctions .
 War, the use of force, is often thought of as the ultimate tool of international relations . It is often used as a tool of diplomacy and diplomacy .
 There is a growing study into 'new wars' involving actors other than states . The study is based on a study of 'new war' involving non-state actors .
 The mobilization of international shame can also be thought of as a tool of International Relations . The mobilization . of international . shame can . also be used to mobilize international shame .
 This is attempting to alter states' actions through 'naming and shaming' at the international level . This is an attempt to alter state's actions by naming and shaming .
 This is mostly done by the large human rights NGOs such as Amnesty International, or Human Rights Watch . This is the work of human rights activists such as Human Rights International .
 A prominent use of was the UN Commission on Human Rights 1235 procedure, which publicly exposes state's human rights violations . The procedure was used to expose the violations of human rights .
 Candidate countries are allowed entry into the EU only after the fulfillment of the Copenhagen criteria . Candidate countries will not be allowed entry to the EU after the fulfilment of the Danish criteria .
 International Relations, like the world community itself, are in transition . International Relations is in transition. International relations, like a world community, is undergoing transition .
 In a rapidly changing world, relations among nation states and international organization and groups are much more important than relations among nations and international organizations . The world is changing more and more than nations and organizations, it is changing .
 It includes a variety of transitional relationships at various levels, above and below the level of the nation states . The world's most important relationship is the relationship of nations, not nations .
 International relations is a multidisciplinary field gathering together the international aspects of politics, economics, geography, history, law, sociology, psychology, psychology and cultural studies .lt is a meta-discipline .
 It is known by now that international relations encompass a myriad of discipline . The scope of international relations can be seen as a matter of discipline in international relations .
 Attempts to structure and intellectualize it have often been thematically and analytically confined to boundaries determined by data . Attempts and intellectualizing it has often been limited to within the boundaries of data, such as data .
 The core concepts of international relations are International Organization, International Law, Foreign Policy, International Conflict, International Economic Relations and Military Thought and Strategy . International Organization is International Organization and International Law .
 Intemational/Regional Security, Strategic Studies, International Political Economy, ConflictAVar and Peace Studies, Globalization, International Regimes. Globalization and Security Studies. International Political Economics . Globalization. International Economic and Security Policy. International Security. Security. Policy . International Political
 It covers state sovereignty, ecological sustainability, nuclear proliferation, nationalism, economic development, terrorism, organized crime, hum.an security, foreign interventionism and human rights . It also covers nuclear proliferation and terrorism .
 These have been grounded in various schools of thought notably Realism and Idealism . Realism is a form of Idealism and Realism . Idealism is an idealism that is grounded in the philosophy of philosophy .
 The scope of international relations has greatly expanded in modem times . International relations has also expanded in the past few decades .
 Initially international relations were concerned only with the study of diplomatic history . The study of international relations was first concerned with history . Now international relations is concerned with international relations .
 It concentrated on the study of contemporary foreign affairs with a view to draw certain lessons . The book was published in 1964 and 1965 .
 Later on emphasis began to he laid on the study of international law and international relations . International relations began to be studied within the framework of international Law . Later on he began to focus on international relations and international law .
 The study of international relations was widened with the establishment of the League of Nations after the First World War . Study of international organizations and institutions was also included within its purview .
 The scope of international relations in the post World War II period got further widened due to significant changes which took place . The emergence of USA and USSR as two superpowers; the entry of a large number of non-European states into the society of nations; the danger of thermo-
 Greater emphasis began to be placed on scientific study of international relations, which led to development of new methodologies and introduction of new theories .
 Intemational relations are eoncemed with every form of interaction between and amongst nations . Intematory relations are thus e once again with every interaction between nations. Intemotional relations are therefore eoncemated with all forms of interaction .
 Such interactions can also occur between corporation and social groups, such as social groups .
 OPEC and Intemational Human Rights Commissions have interactions between member states . Examples are interactions between OPEC member states of the OPEC or Human Rights Commission members . Examples of interactions are between OPEC members and the IRC .
 The moment such interactions cross a state boundary it is of interest to the study of Intemational Relations . The moment these interactions cross the state boundary is important for Intemotional Relations .
 Intemational relations recognize and respond to the fact that foreign policy goals that nations pursue can be a matter of permanent consequences to some or all of the others . The U.S. has a long history of "intemational diplomacy"
 Realism or political realism prioritizes national interest and security over ideology, moral concerns and social reconstructions . Realism is the study of international relations and international relations . Realist is a modern form of international diplomacy .
 There is no actor above states capable of regulating their interactions . States must arrive at relations with other states on their own, rather than it being dictated to them by some higher controlling entity, says David Cameron .
 In pursuit of national security, states strive to attain as many resources as possible . States strive for national security in pursuit of as many as possible.
 States are unitary actors each moving towards their own national interest . States move towards each other's own national interests . States are unitsary actors, each moving to their own interests .
 The overriding national interest of each state is its national security and survival and survival, says Gov. Rick Perry . Perry: "Each state is in its own interest in each other's national security"
 Relations between states are determined by their levels of power derived primarily from their military and economic capabilities . Relations between countries are determined primarily by their military, economic and political power .
 The interjection of morality and values into international relations causes reckless commitments, diplomatic rigidity, and the escalation of conflict . The interjects of morality into international . relations cause reckless commitments and diplomatic . rigidity in international relations .
 Sovereign states are the principal actors in the international system . Special attention is afforded to large powers as they have the most influence on the international stage .
 International institutions, nongovernmental organizations, multinational corporations, individuals and other sub-state or trans-state actors are viewed as having little independent influence . International institutions are seen as having few independent influence in the world .
 Realists believe that mankind is not inherently benevolent but rather self-centered and competitive . In summary, realists believe mankind is more selfish and competitive than benevolent .
 Hobbes views human nature as egocentric and conflictual unless there exist conditions under which humans may coexist . Hobbes' perspective is shared by theorists such as Thomas Hobbes, who views human conflictual .
 This view contrasts with the approach of liberalism to international relations . This view of liberalism contrasts with that of liberalism, it says .
 Realists believe that states are inherently aggressive and/or obsessed with security . They say territorial expansion is only constrained by opposing powers . Realists think that states only have to be constrained by opposition .
 Security becomes a zero-sum game where only relative gains can be made . Thus, security becomes a 'zero-sum' game where relative gains are made . Security can only be reduced to relative gains in relative terms .
 Realists believe that there are no universal principles with which all states may guide their actions . Realists say that there is no universal principle to guide all states' actions in the world .
 A state must always be aware of the actions of the states around it and must use a pragmatic approach to resolve problems as they arise . Instead of always being aware of actions of other states, a state must use an approach to solve problems as it arises .
 Sun Tzu was an ancient Chinese military strategist who wrote the Art of War . He was the founder of the modern world's most famous military strategist . Sun Tz wrote the "Art of War" in China .
 Han Feizi was a Chinese scholar who theorised Legalism . He served in the court of the King of Qin later unifier of China ending the Warring States Period .
 He theorised about a neutral, manipulative ruler who would act as Head of State w'hile controlling the executive through his ministers . The ruler would secretly control the executive .
 Niccolo Machiavelli, a Florentine political philosopher, wrote II Principe in which he held that the sole aim of a prince was to seek power, regardless of religious or ethical considerations . He held that a prince's sole aim was to gain power .
 Cardinal Richelieu was French statesman who destroyed domestic factionalism and guided France to a position of dominance in foreign affairs . He was known for his role in the French Revolution .
 Frederick the Great transformed Prussia into a great European power through warfare and diplomacy . Frederick was the Prussian monarch who transformed his country into a major European power .
 Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Perigord was French diplomat who guided France and Europe through a variety of political systems . He was known for his role in the continent's political system . He guided France through a number of different political systems in Europe .
 Austrian statesman opposed political revolution opposed to political revolution . Prince Klemens Wenzel von Mettemich was born in Koblenz-bom Austria .
 Otto von Bismarck, Prussian statesman who coined the term balance of power, coined the idea balance of powers . Otto of the German-speaking Prussian state of Germany .
 Balancing power means balancing power means keeping the peace . Realpolitik practitioners try to avoid arms races and avoid arms arms races .
 Classical realism states that it is fundamentally the nature of man that pushes states and individuals to act in a way that places interests over ideologies .
 This evolution was partly fueled by European war migrants like Hans Morgenthau . The evolution was fueled by war migrants who came to Germany from Europe .
 Hedley Bull's 1977 classic The Anarchical Society is a key statement of this position . The Anarchist Society is an example of the anarchist society .
 Neorealism derives from classical realism except that instead of human nature, its focus is predominantly on the international system . Barry Buzan is the author of "Neorealism" and "Structuralism"
 While states remain the principal actors, greater attention is given to the forces above and below the states through analysis or debate .
 The international system is seen as a structure acting on the state with individuals below the level of the state acting as agency on state as a whole . Individuals below the state are seen as agency agents for the state .
 neorealism shares a focus on the international system with the English School . Neorealism differs in the emphasis it places on the permanence of conflict .
 States must be on constant preparation for conflict through economic and military build-up . To ensure state security, states must be prepared for conflict, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 It is a synthesis of the neorealist and the classical realist approaches . It is the work of a realist-realist writer and a modernist artist .
 Gideon Rose is responsible for coining the term in a book review he wrote . Gideon Rose was responsible for writing the book review . He coined the term "gideon"
 The basic approach was for these authors to ""refine, not refute, Kenneth Waltz"", by adding domestic intervening variables between systemic incentives and a state's foreign policy decision . The authors' approach was to add domestic factors to the equation .
 Neoclassical realism is particularly appealing from a research standpoint because it still retains a lot of the theoretical rigor that Waltz has brought to realism . The main method for testing theories is the process-tracing of case studies, says Waltz .
 George F Kennan's work as a diplomat and diplomatic historian remains relevant to the debate over American foreign policy . Since the 19th century, foreign policy has been characterized by a shift from the Founding Fathers' realist school to the idealistic or Wilsonian school of international relations .
 In realist tradition, security is based on the principle of a balance of power . The reliance on morality as the sole determining factor in statecraft is considered impractical . Security is based upon the principle that it is not only a matter of morality .
 According to the Wilsonian approach, democracy abroad as a foreign policy is key and morals are universally valid . The spread of democracy abroad is key to spreading democracy abroad, says Wilson . According to Wilson's approach, morals are universal valid .
 American diplomacy reflected the Wilsonian school to such a degree that those in favor of the realist approach likened Clinton's policies to social work . Clinton's foreign policy was similar to that of social work in the United States .
 Kennan's concept of American diplomacy was based on the realist approach, according to Kennan . Such moralism without regard to the realities of power and the national interest is self-defeating, he says .
 He defines the neurobiological substrates of human nature that motivate behavior as basic needs, ego, and fear . The neurobiologist defines the need and fear that drive behavior .
 Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that humans can aspire to higher things such as morality . He argues that when basic survival needs are met, morality can be achieved . He says that morality can only be achieved when morality is met .
 In order for society to prosper, the state of nature among individugls must be mitigated . Thus, in order to help society prosper, society must have mitigated. Thus, society needs to be able to prosper .
 This has historically been done through the establishment of states and of domestic governments . This has been done by state and domestic governments, it has been said .
 Relations between states have historically and continue to be dominated by anarchy . Internationally, however, the relations between states and anarchy have historically been dominated by states .
 With no overarching authority to regulate state behavior and ensure the safety and prosperity of all, international life could be considered somewhat precarious . International life is somewhat precarious, with no overarching power to regulate behavior .
 Nayef Al-Rodhan argues that increased integration brought about by globalization helps to mitigate the consequences of global anarchy . Nayef: Increased integration brings about by global anarchy helps mitigate the problems .
 globalization is also undermining the capacity of states to act as viable sites for collective action and credible commitments . However, globalization also undermines the capacity for states to take part in collective action .
 The states are becoming more intertwined in webs of power that are linked to shifts in the material distribution of power and authoritative resources . This is because the states are more intertwined with webs of state-to-state power, say experts .
 The state’s domestic role is being transformed by the increasingly important interests of transnational capital . In other words, the state's domestic role has been transformed by transnational interests .
 Nayef Al-Rodhan maintains that in order for societies to prosper materially and morally, humanity needs some form of governance that can ensure that the basic survival needs of human beings and states are satisfied in the context of increased interdependence and instant connectivity . He says the new emerging dynamics
 This conception of international relations allows for absolute rather than just relative gains . It stresses that all states can benefit from cooperation and non-conflictual competition . The concept of international diplomacy is based on cooperation rather than relative gain .
 Symbiotic realism goes beyond the state-centrism of realism, integrating a number of actors that have often been underemphasized or ignored by the realist paradigm, such as multi-national corporations, international organizations, the biosphere, and women .
 This is vital, since these, too, are all important actors that help to reproduce the global order . This is important, since they have a bearing on the relations and dynamics of the world's order .
 Democratic peace theory advocates also that Realism is not applicable to democratic states' relations with each another, as their studies claim that such states do not go to war with one another . Criticisms include that the theory is not valid for democratic states to engage in war .
 Realists and proponents of other schools have critiqued both this claim and studies which appear to support it, claiming that its definitions of 'war' and 'democracy' must be tweaked in order to achieve the desired result .
 Federalism refers to the theory or advocacy of federal political orders . Final authority is divided between sub-units and a centre . Federalism is a form of federalism .
 Unlike a unitary state, sovereignty is constitutionally split between at least two territorial levels . Units at each level have final authority and can act independently of the others in some area .
 Typically the centre has powers regarding defence and foreign policy . Sub-units may also have international roles, such as sub-units .
 The basic idea behind federalism is that a unifying relationship between states should be established under a common system of law . Federalism is the idea of unifying relationships between states under common law .
 Conflict and disagreement should be resolved through peaceful means, rather than through coercion or war . Conflict should not be resolved by war or coercion, rather by peaceful means rather than by coercion .
 Different types of institutions are needed to deal with different types of political issues, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Sun Tzu was an ancient Chinese military strategist who vvTote the Art of War . He was one of the most influential thinkers in the world .
 Frederick the Great, PfQssian monarch who transformed Prussia into a great European power through warfare and diplomacy . Frederick was the first king of Prussia to become a European power .
 Austrian statesman opposed political revolution opposed to political revolution . Prince Klemens Wenzel von MAtemich was a member of the Koblenz-bom group .
 Modem realism began as a serious field of research in the U.S. during and after World War 11 . The field of realism was a serious topic of research for the United States . Modem realistic is a form of realism .
 The English School holds that the international system, while anarchical in structure, forms a ""society of states"" where common norms and interests allow for more order and stability than what might be expected in a strict realist view . Carr 13: Liberal realism or the English school .
 Medley Bull's 1977 classic entitled The Anarchical Society is a key statement of this position . The Anarchist Society is an example of the Anarchist society .
 The ideas behind George F Kerman's work as a diplomat and diplomatic historian remain relevant to the debate over American foreign policy . Since the 19th century, foreign policy has been characterized by a shift from the Founding Fathers' realist school to the idealistic or Wilsonian school of international
 Kerman says moralism without regard to the realities of power and national interest is self-defeating . Such moralism will lead to the erosion of power, to America's detnment, he says .
 Nayef AlRodhan argues that when basic survival needs met, humans can aspire to higher things such as morality . Nayef argues that morality can be achieved when people have basic needs met . The author also argues that humans can also aspire to morality .
 The state of nature among individuals among individuals must be mitigated . Thus, in order for society to prosper, society must have mitigated. Thus, society will prosper if it does .
 The basic idea behind federalism is that a unifying relationship between states should be eUablished under a common system of law . Federalism is based on the idea of state-to-state relations under common law .
 The First World War, known as the Great War before 1939 and as World War One after 1950, lasted from August to the final ArmfiTice with Germany on November 11, 1918 . The World War I lasted between August 1914 and 1918 .
 Some question the appropriateness of the term ‘world war’ because it was largely a buropean . Some question whether the term is appropriate to refer to the war .
 Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, India, and other British dominions and colonies contributed troops to the conflict . The United States also entered the conflict in the early years of the war .
 France, Russia, and the Unit ed S tates defeated the Central Powers . led by the German Empire, I he Austro-H ungarian Empire, and . the Ottoman Empire, led by Germany .
 It also brought about radical change in the European and Middle Eastern maps . The maps were created in the 1930s and 1940s .
 Allied Powers before 1917 are sometimes referred to as the Triple Entente . Central Powers are sometimes called the Triple Alliance . The Central Powers were the Allied Entente before 1917 . Allied Powers were known as the Central Entente and the Allied Alliance .
 Many people believed that this would be the last European conflict and that diplomacy and detente would resolve differences . Many people thought this was the end of the conflict and diplomacy would solve differences .
 Many question whether the war was necessary, suggesting that it could have been avoided . Many question the war itself, suggesting it could be avoided .
 The legacy of the war, in many respects, was World War H, which was rooted in the punitive sanctions that the World War I's victors placed on Germany . Germany was forced to withdraw from the war in order to win the war . The war was the result of World War
 The war can be represented as totalitarian regi mes verses democratic regimes, but that is a somewhat simplistic analysis . The rivalry ana jealousy between the two' sides was a fundamental issue, says historian .
 Germany felt that it was entitled to an empire; Britain, France, and even Belgium possessed extensive overseas territory . Germany had just a few colonies while Britain had extensive overseas territories .
 The democratization process was more advanced among the Allies than in Germany and her main ally, the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire was one of the most important allies of the Allies .
 Humanity should learn from the legacy of this war that war cannot end war, it can only lead to more violence . Humanity must learn from this legacy of the war, and not just end war .
 The higher principle of peaceful resolution of differences attracted much interest after 1918 when the Teague of Nations was formed . But the nations of the world were ‘unwilling to establish this as an effective body, being reluctant to give it any real power’
 Woodrow Wilson had been one of its chief architects but the U.S.A. did not join and league members tended to act in their own interest, rather than that of all members .
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austrian throne, was assassinated in Sarajevo by Gavrilo Princip of Young Bosnia . Princip was a group whose aims included unification of the South Slavs and independence from Austria .
 This assassination set in motion a series of fast-moving events that escalated into a full-scale war . The assassination set the stage for the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy .
 Historians and political scientists have grappled with this question for nearly a century without reaching a consensus . Historians have debated the question for more than 100 years .
 The treaty that ended the war required Germany to admit to being the aggressor . This was achieved in the context of Germany's defeat, economic sanctions, 7 and the threat of renewed hostilities .
 The damage this caused to national pride would help Adolf Hitler's rise to power . The damage was caused by national pride .
 Alliances emboldened participating nations, leading each of them to believe they had powerful backing . The U.S. joined forces with Russia and Ukraine in 2009 .
 Both camps functioned in unique ways that contributed to the spread of war . Both camps contributed to spread of the war in Iraq .
 For the Triple Alliance, the strong relationship between Germany and Austria expanded the conflict to a level where it would include at least four participants . The Triple Alliance would include Germany, Austria, Austria and Germany .
 Russia, France, and Britain had a relationship that was much less certain in 1914 . Each made the decision to go to war without collaborative consultation and with own interests in mind .
 The German-British naval arms race drastically intensified after the 1906 launch of the HMS Dreadnought, a revolutionary battleship that made all previous battleships obsolete . The German and British arms race began in 1906 after the launch of a revolutionary battle ship .
 A major naval arms race in shipbuilding developed, related to the concept of new imperialism, furthering the interest in alliances . A major arms race was developed in the early 1900s .
 Kennedy argues that both nations adopted United States Rear Admiral Alfred Thayer Mahan's conclusion that control of the oceans was vital to a great nation . Kennedy: Both nations adopted the conclusion that controlling the oceans is vital to the nation .
 The concentration kept related industries active and unemployment down while minimizing internal strife through the focus on a common, patriotic goal . Additionally, this concentration of related industries kept employment down .
 Different scholars have different opinions about the degree of the arms race was itself a cause of the war . The arms race is thought to have been a major factor in World War II .
 Many political scientists argue that German, French, and Russian war plans automatically escalated the conflict . The First out of the Gate theory .
 Fritz Fischer and his followers emphasized the inherently aggressive nature of Germany's Schlieffen Plan, which outlined German strategy if at war with both France and Russia . The plan was outlined in the Schlieffen Plan .
 Germany had to eliminate one opponent quickly before attacking the other, relying on a strict timetable . Conflict on fivo fronts meant that Germany must eliminate one of its opponents quickly .
 France's well defended border with Germany meant that an attack through Belgian territory was necessary . The attack created a number of unexpected problems for the French forces .
 France's own Plan XVII called for an offensive thrust into Germany's industrial Ruhr Valley, crippling Germany's ability to wage war . In a greater context, France's plan XVII also called for a thrust into the industrial area of Germany .
 Russia's revised Plan XIX implied a mobilization of its armies against both Austria-Hungary and Germany . Russia's plan was intended to mobilize its armies in response to the outbreak of World War II .
 All three created an atmosphere where generals and planning staffs were anxious to take the initiative and seize decisive victories using these elaborate mobilization plans .
 Once mobilization orders were issued, it was understood by both generals and statesmen alike that there was little or no possibility of turning back or sacrificing a key advantage .
 The problern oft'ommunications in 1914 should also not be underestimated . All nations still used telegraphy and ambassadors as the main form of communication .
 The idea was that aristocrats had too much control over Gennany, Russia, and Austria . The war was a consequence of their thirst for military power and disdain for democracy, the author says .
 Anti-German propaganda cast Kaiser Wilhelm II and Prussian military tradition in a negative light . This was a theme that figured prominently in anti-war propaganda .
 Wilson .'iCpcd the League of Nations and universal disarmament would secure a lasting peace, although he failed to secure United States support for the league . Wilson .
 He also acknowledged variations t f militarism that, in his opinion, existed within the British and Frencli political systems .
 Lenin famously asserted that the worldwide system of imperialism was responsible for the war . Economic iniperiaiism is Lenin's theory that imperialism is responsible for World War II .
 Tohn A Hobson predicted that the outcome of economic imperialism would lead to a global military conflict . Hobson had earlier predicted that unlimited competition for expanding markets would result in a global conflict .
 The argument proved persuasive in the immediate wake of the war and assisted in the rise of Marxism and Communism . This argument proved successful in the aftermath of the War and the rise in Communism .
 Large banking interests in the various capitalist-imperialist powers had pulled the strings m the various governments and led them into the war . The Highest Stage of Capitalism""ade the argument that large banking interests  had pulled  the strings .
 Civilian leaders of European pow'ers faced a wave of nationalist zeal that had been building across Europe for years . InenMries of war faded or were convoluted into a romantic fantasy .
 Diplomatic efforts to mediate the Austrian-Serbian quarrel simply became inelevant . Public and elite opinion commonly demanded war to uphold’national honor .
 Most of the belligerents envisioned swift victory and glorious consequences . Most of them envisioned swift victories and glory glory . But most of them were not so swift .
 The Spirit of 1914 was full of that very optimism regarding the post-war future . The patriotic enthusiasm, unit>’ and ultimate euphoria that took hold during the . spirit of 1914 took hold in 1914 .
 SocialistDemocratic movement had begun to exert pressure on aristocrats throughout Europe . aristocrats hoped that victory would reunite their countries via the consolidation of their domestic hegemony .
 Lord Kitchener and Erich Ludendorff were among those who predicted that modem warfare would be a lengthy excursion . How'ever, they predicted that modelled warfare would take a long time .
 A localized war between Austria-Hungary and Serbia was made possible due to Austria's deteriorating world position and the Pan-Slavic separatist movement in the Balkans . The war was the result of Austria's deterioration and the Pan Slavic separate 
 The expansion of such ethnic sentiments coincided with the growth of Serbia and the decline of the Ottoman Empire, as the latter had previously mled much of the region . The expansion coincided with Serbia's growth and decline of Ottoman Empire .
 Imperial Russia supported the Pan-Slavic movement, motivated by ethnic loyalties, dissatisfaction with Austria . Imperial Russia also supported the movement . It was a cent-old dream of a v/arm water port .
 For the Germans, both the Napoleonic Wars and Thirty Years' War were characterized by incursions which had a lasting psychological effect . Gemiany's precarious position in the center of Europe ultimately led to the decision for an active defense, culminating in the Schlieffen Plan .
 The transfer of Alsace and Lorraine territories and defeat in the Franco-Prussian War influenced France's policy, 9 characterized b}' revanchism . At the same time, the transfer of the contested Alsaced territories and loss of the French territories in France's war
 Two-front war became a distinct possibility for Germany . However, after the League of the Three Emperors fell apart, the French formed an alliance with Russia and a two front war became possible .
 The First World War ended with Europe scarred by trenches, spent of its resources, and littered with the bodies of the millions who died in battle . Aftermath of the war ended with the death toll of millions .
 The direct consequences of World War I brought many old regimes crashing to the ground, and ultimately, would lead to the end of three hundred years of European hegemony in the world . The direct . consequences of the . World War . I think of the end to European hegemony .
 No other war had changed the map of Europe so dramatical ly . Four empires were shattered -- the German, the Austro-Hungarian, the Ottoman, and thd""Russian .
 After the war, Germany's overseas colonies were placed under Allied control . Former Ottoman Empire provinces of the former Ottoman Empire were mandated to France, Italy, and the United Kingdom .
 Heavy reparations were written into the treaty, together with restrictions on the manufacture of anns . Heavy reparations were written into . The treaty was written into, along with restrictions .
 The First World War is known as the nation's " baptism of fire" as it was the first major war in which the newly established countries fought . It is one of the first cases where Australian troops fought as Australians, not just subjects of the British Crown .
 Anzac Day is held in great few days of remembrance by many Australians and New Zealanders . Anzac day is celebrated in Australia and NZ .
 Anglo-Canadians believe that they proved they were their own country. and not just snhir r^R Rritish Empire. Similarly, Anglo-Canadian believe they proved themselves to be themselves .
 Many Canadians refer to their country aTTlr^on ""forged from fire" as Canadians were respected internationally as an independent nation from the conflagrations of war and bravery .
 Canadians commemorate the war dead on Remembrance Day . Like their Britisn counterparts, Canadians commemorate their war dead . Canada's war dead are commemorated every day in Canada .
 Indian troops had also fought in the war and now felt that they should have a greater say in running India . Indian troops also fought for the country in the conflict .
 The optimism for world peace of the i vOOs w§s was gone, and those who fought in the war became what is known as the Los t Generation . Those who fought for the war never fully recovered from their experiences .
 For the next few years, much of Europe began its mourning . Memorials were erected in thousands of villages and towns across Europe .
 Some people were revolted by nationalisrp -and what it had supposedly caused and began to work towai t fnore internationalist world, supporting internationalist organizations such as the League of Nations .
 Others had the opposite reaction, feeling that only strength and military might could be relied upon for protection in a chaotic world that did not respect notions of civilization .
 The rise of Nazism and fascismin eluded a revival of the nationalistic spirit oi e pre-war years and, on principle, a rejection of many post-war changes .
 Accepting of the scapegoat mythos signified a rejection of the ""lessons"" of the war and therefore, a rejection . Similarly, t 20 International Relations po;;iilp.rity of the Dolchstosslegende was a testament to the psychological state of the
 The extreme economic hardship in Germany that developed after the war helped breed conditions for Hitler's rise to power there . Also, the extreme economic hardships in Germany developed after that war . Hitler was the only German leader to escape from the Nazi Party .
 A sense of disillusionment and cynicism became pronounced with Nihilism growing in popularity . This disillusionment towards humanity found a cultural climax with the pessimistic existentialism of Sartre and Camus .
 Many people believed that the war heralded the end of the world as they had known it, including the collapse of capitalism and imperialism . The war was the first of its kind, with many people believing that it was the end to capitalism .
 Communistand socialist movements around the world drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a level of popularity they had never known before . The theory was popular in the 1930s and 1940s .
 These feelings were most pronounced in areas directly or particularly harshly affected by the war, especially within Europe, especially in Europe .
 World War II World War IT, was a global military conflict that took nlace between IQIQ and 1945 . World War I took place during the war in 1945 .
 The date commonly given for the start of the war is September 1. 1939 . N azi Germany invaded Poland .
 The United iCingdom and Fr^cedeclafed war on Germany, although the only European battles remained in Poland . Wit hin two days the U.C. and Fr.E. Cingdom declared war .
 The S oviet Union joined with Germany on September 17, 1939, to conquer Poland and to divide Eastern Europe . The Allies were initially made up of Poland, the British Empire, France, and the French Empire .
 German y, Italy, and Japans i^ed a^ ' mutual Jel'eiise agicoiiici'it, th e Tripartite Pact, and were known as the Axis Powers, nine months later .
 Japan attacked the U.S. in 1941, bringing it into the war on the Allied side . In~Deccmber 1941, the United States was attacked by Japan .
 Battles raged across all of Europte, in the North Atlantic Ocean, across North Africa, across Southeast Asia, and China, across the Pacific Ocean and in the air over Germany and Japan . China also joined the Allies, as did most of the rest of the world .
 After World War II, Europe was split into western and Soviet spheres of influence . Europe was divided between the western and the Soviet sphere of influence after the war .
 Western Europe later aligned as NATOan d Eastern Europe a s the Warsaw Pact . Eastern Europe was aligned as a part of NATO . Western Europe aligned as part of the NATO alliance .
 China's civil war continued into the 1950s, resulting eventually in the establishment of the People's Republic of China . The civil war in China ended in 1950s .
 The real effectiveness of this body has been compromised because member states act when it suits them, and sometimes by-pass it altogether, says the head of the European Union .
 Allies over Axis powers usually regarded as having safeguarded democracy and freedom . Ihe victory, though, of the Allies over the Axis powers, is regarded as safeguering democracy .
 The Holocaust represented one of the most evil incidents in human history . The Holocaust was one of humanity's most heinous acts of evil .
 The Allies cannot be said to have conducted the war according to the highest standards of combat . Mass bombings provoked one leading British Bishop, George Bell, to withdraw his support for the just cause of the war .
 Commonly held general causes for WWI are the rise of natujnalism, militarism, and u nresolved territorial issues . Causes include rise of nationalism, rise of militarism and militarism .
 The treaty's provisions were laxly enforced due to fear of another war . Closely related is the failure of the British and French policy of appeasement which sought to avoid war but actually gave Hitler time to re-arm .
 Japan invaded China in order to bolster its meager stock of natural resources . Japan ruled by a militarist clique devoted to becoming a world power invaded China .
 This angered the United States, which reacted by making loans to China, providing covert inilitaiy' assistance . The U.S. responded by instituting increasingly broad embargoes of raw materials against Japan .
 Japan was faced with the choice of withdrawing from China or going to war in order to conquer the oil resources of the Dutch East Indies . These embargoes would have eventually wi'ecked Japan's economy .
 The U.S. chose to proceed with plans for the Greater East Asia War in the Pacific in the 1950s . It chose to continue with plans to fight in the region .
 On May 19, Poland and France pledged to provide each other with military assistance in the event either was attacked . Poland, France pledged each other to provide assistance in May 19 .
 The British had already offered support to the Poles in March . On August 23, Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact . The British offered support for the Poles .
 The pact included a secret protocol which would divide eastern Europe into German and Soviet areas of interest . The pact was signed by the Soviet Union and Germany in 1961 .
 Each country agreed to allow the other a free hand in its area of influence, including military occupation . Each country will be allowed to allow a free-hand in its areas of influence .
 The signing of a new alliance between Britain and Poland on August 25, deterred him for only a few days . The new alliance was signed by the Polish-British alliance in August .
 French mobilized slowly, then mounted a token offensive in the Saar, which they soon abandoned . The British could not take any direct action in support of the Poles in the time available .
 On September 9, the Germans reached Warsaw, Poland, having slashed through the Polish defenses . Meanwhile, on September 10, the German forces reached Warsaw .
 Polish president and commander-in-chief both fled to Romania a day after the coup . A day later the Polish leader and his wife fled the country to Romania .
 Poles made a significant contribution to the Allies' cause for the duration of World War 11 . In the aftermath of the September Campaign, occupied Poland managed to create a powerful resistance movement . Poles made significant contributions to the Allied cause during the war .
 After Poland fell, Germany paused to regroup during the winter of 1939-1940 until April 1940 . The British and French stayed on the defensive while the British stayed on their defensive .
 The period was referred to by journalists as ""the Phony War,"" or the ""Sitzkrieg,"" because so little ground combat took place . During this period, journalists referred to it as the "Phony War" because of the lack of ground combat .
 Gennan U-boats operated against Allied shipping in the North Atlantic . Battle of the Atlantic was fought in the Atlantic between the U.S. and Allied ships .
 The submarines made up in skill, luck, and daring what they lacked in numbers . They were made up of skill and luck, but lacked numbers .
 One U-boat sank the British aircraft carrier HMS Courageous . Another sank the battleship HMS Royal Oak in its home anchorage .
 In the South Atlantic, the German pocket battleship Admiral Graf Speeraided Allied shipping, then was scuttled after the battle of the River Plate . The German pocket-battleship Admiral Speeraaid Allied shipping in the area .
 About a year and a half later, another German raider, the battleship Bismarck,suffered a similar fate in the North Atlantic . Another German battleship, the Battleship Fususus, was also sunk in the same way .
 German surface raiders had little impact because their numbers were so small . Unlike the U-boat threat, which had a serious impact later in the war, the U.S. had little .
 Finland surrendered to the Soviet Union in March 1940 and signed the Moscow Peace Treaty in which the Finns made territorial concessions to the Soviets . Finland was defeated by the Soviet Russia in 1940 . The treaty was signed in 1940 and was signed by Finland's President Roosevelt .
 Later that year, the Soviet Union occupied Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia, and annexed Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina from Romania . The Soviet Union annexed the region in June .
 Germany invaded Denmark and Norway on April 9, 1940, in part to counter the threat of an impending Allied invasion of Norway .
 Denmark did not resist, but Norway fought back . British, French, and Polish forces landed in support of the Norwegians .
 By late June, the Allies were defeated and German forces were in control of most of Norway . What remained of the Norwegian Army had surrendered .
 The British Expeditionary Force and the French Army advanced into northern Belgium . They planned to fight a mobile war in the north while maintaining a static continuous front along the Maginot Line, built after World War I .
 Fall Gelb, the Wehrmacht's Panzergruppe von Kleistraced through the Ardennes, broke the French line at Sedan . Then slashed across northern France to the English Channel, splitting the Allies in two . The Allies were split in two by the
 Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands fell quickly against the attack of German Army Group B . The BEF, encircled in the north, was evacuated from Dunkirk in Operation Dynamo .
 Fall Rot advanced behind the Maginot Line and near the coast of France . Fall Rot continued its conquest of France with Fall Rot advancing . German forces then continued to advance on the coast .
 France signed an armistice with Germany on June 22, 1940, leading to the establishment of the Vichy France puppet government in the unoccupied part of France . France signed a peace treaty with Germany in June 1940 .
 Following the defeat of France, Britain chose to fight on . Germany began preparations in summer of 1940 to invade Britain . While Britain made anti-invasion preparations, Germany began to prepare .
 The war between the two air forces became known as the Battle of Britain . The war was the first of its kind and lasted for more than a decade .
 The results were not as expected, so the Luftwaffelater turned to terror bombing London . The result of the bombing was not as well as expected .
 The Germans failed to defeat the Royal Air Force, thus Operation Sea Lion was postponed and eventually canceled . Operation Sea Lions was canceled after it was postponed .
 Italy declared war in June 1940, which challenged British supremacy of the Ivleditemanean . Hinged on Gibraltar, Malta, and Alexandria . O North African Campaign .
 In September, Italian forces in Libya attacked British forces in Egypt . The North African Campaign began when Italian forces attacked British troops .
 The aim was to make Egypt an Italian possession, especially the vital Suez Canaleast of Egypt . The aim of the Italian government was to gain control of the Suez .
 British, Indian, and Australian forces counter-attacked in Operation Compass . Operation Compass was stopped in 1941 when much of the Commonwealth forces were transferred to Greece to defend it from German attack .
 German forces under General Erwin Rommellanded in Libya and renewed the assault on Egypt . However, German forces continued the assault in Libya .
 Italy invaded Greece on October 28, 1940, from bases in Albania . The invasion occurred after the Greek Premier John Metaxas rejected an ultimatum to hand over Greek territory .
 Despite the enormous superiority' of the Italian forces, the Greek army forced the Italians into a massive retreat deep into Albania . The Italian army was forced to retreat into Albania deep into the country .
 The Greek army had inflicted upon the Axis Powers their first defeat in the war, and Nazi Germany would soon be forced to intervene .
 This program was the first large step away from American isolationism, providing for substantial assistance to the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and other countries . This program provided substantial assistance .
 Yugoslavia's government succumbed to the pressure of the Axis and signed the Tripartite Treaty on March 25, but the government was overthrown in a coup which replaced it with a pro-Allied government . The government of Yugoslavia was replaced by a government of pro-allied pro-
 This prompted the Germans to invade 24 International Relations Yugoslavia on April 6 . The Germans invaded Yugoslavia in the early 1950s .
 Yugoslavia was occupied in a matter of days, and the army surrendered on April 17, but partisan resistance lasted throughout the war . Yugoslavia was taken over by the Serbians, but the partisan resistance continued throughout the conflict .
 The rapid downfall of Yugoslavia allowed German forces to enter Greek territory through the Yugoslav frontier . German forces entered Greece through the border of Yugoslavia .
 58,000 British and Commonwealth troops who had been sent to help the Greeks were driven back and soon forced to evacuate . The British military was forced to withdraw from the Greek capital .
 On April 27, German forces entered Athens which was followed by the end of organized Greek resistance . The end of the organized resistance was the beginning of the German invasion .
 The occupation of Greece proved costly, as guerilla warfarecontinually plagued the Axis occupiers . The occupation proved costly for the Axis .
 Operation Barbarossa, the largest invasion in history, began June 22, 1941 . Invasion of Soviet Union was largest invasion of history, largest invasion ever in history .
 Axis force of over four million soldiers advanced rapidly deep into the Soviet Union, destroying almost the entire western Soviet army in huge battles of encirclement . Soviets dismantled as much industry as possible ahead of the advancing forces, moving it to the Ural Mountains .
 Axis had reached a line at the gates of Leningrad, Moscow, and Rostov, at the cost of about 23 percent casualties . By late November, the Axis had . reached a . line at . the gates at the . gates of Moscow, Rostov . and Lening
 The German General Staff had underestimated the sizip ol tlie Soviet army and its ability to draft new troops . The German general Staff had overestimated the Soviet army .
 They were dismayed by the presence of new forces, including fresh Siberian troops under General Zhukov, and the onset of a particularly cold winter . They were now dismayed .
 The Atlantic Charter was a joint declaration by Cherchill and Roosevelt, August 14, 1.941. Roosevelt . It was made in response to a request from Cherchil and Roosevelt .
 Churchill met Roosevelt again at the Arcadia Conference in December 1941 . Churchill and Roosevelt met again in late December* 1941, 1941 .
 The Americans proposed a 1942 cross-channel invasion of France which the British strongly opposed, suggesting instead a small invasion in Norway or landings in French North Africa . The British opposed the idea .
 Mediterranean Rommel's forees advanced rapidly eastward, laying siege to the vital seaport of Tobruk . Rommel advanced eastward and laid siege to vital seagort of the vital city .
 Two Allied attempts to relieve Tobruk were defeated, but a larger offensive at the end of the year drove Rommel back after heavy fighting .
 Battle of Crete began on May 20, 1944, when elite German parachute and gliderborne mountain troops launched a massive airborne invasion of the Greek island . The battle began in Crete, Greece, in May 1944 .
 Their invasion on two airfields failed, but they successfully captured one, which allowed them to reinforce their position and capture the island in a little over one week . The invasion failed but they captured one of the islands .
 In August, British and Soviet troops occupied neutral Iranto secure its oil and a southern supply line to Russia .
 A war had begun in East Asia before World War 11 started in Europe . Pacific theater Sino-Japanese war began in China in 1950s .
 On July 7, 1937, Japan, after occupying Manchuriain 1931, launched another attack against China .
 The city eventually fell to the Japanese and in December 1937, the capital city Nanking fell . Nanking was eventually taken over by the Japanese forces .
 The Chinese government moved its seat to Chongqing for the rest of the war . As a result, the Chinese government had to move its seat from the war seat . The seat was moved to Chongquing, which is now located in the eastern city .
 Japanese forces committed brutal atrocities against civilians and prisoners of war when Nanking was occupied . As many as 300,000 civilians were slaughtered within a month of the Japanese occupation .
 The war by 1940 had reached a stalemate with both sides making minimal gains . Both sides made minimal gains in the war .
 The Chinese had successfully defendeo their land from oncoming Japanese on several occasions . Strong resistance in areas occupied by the Japanese made a victory seem impossible to the Japanese . The Chinese successfully defendedeo .
 In the summer of 1941, the United States began an oil embargo against Japan . The embargo was a protest to Japan's incursion into French Indo-China and the continued invasion of China .
 Japan planned an attack on Pearl Harbor to cripple the U.S. Pacific Fleet before consolidating oil fields in the Dutch East Indies . Japan planned to attack the United States Pacific Fleet .
 On December 7, a Japanese carrier fleet launched a surprise air attack on Pearl Harbor, Hawaii . The attack was a surprise attack on the island nation .
 The raid resulted in two U.S. battleships sunk, and six damaged but later repaired and returned to service . Two battleships were sunk and six were damaged .
 The raid failed to find any aircraft carriers-and did not damage Pearl Harbor's usefulness as a naval base . Pearl Harbor was a major naval base in the U.S.
 The attack strongly united public opinion in the United States against Japan . The U.S. public opinion was united against the attack .
 Germany declared war on the United States on December 11, 1941 . It was not obliged to do so under the Tripartite Pact . The U.S. declared war even though it did not comply with the pact .
 Hitler hoped that Japan would support Germany by attacking the Soviet Union . Hitler hoped for Japan to support him by attacking Soviet Union. Hitler hoped the attack would support him .
 Hitler's diplomatic blunder proved a catastrophic blunder which unified the American public's support for the war . Japan did not oblige, and this diplomatic move by Hitler proved to be a disastrous blunder . The U.S. public was unified in the war against Japan .
 Japan invaded the Philippines and the British colonies of Hong Kong, Peninsular Malaysia, Borneo, and Burma . The invasion was intended to seize the oilfields of the Dutch East Indies .
 Despite fierce resistance by American, Philippine, British, Canadian, and Indian forces, all these territories capitulated to the Japanese in a matter of months . All these territories were taken over by the Japanese .
 The British island fortress of Singapore was captured in what Churchill considered one of the most humiliating British defeats of all time . Singapore captured in one of Churchill's most humiliating defeats of his time .
 At the end of the war, millions of refugees were homeless, the European economy had collapsed, and 70 percent of the European industrial infrastructure was destroyed .
 The original divide of Germany was between America, Soviet Union, and Britain . Germany was divided between the U.S. and the Soviet Union in the early 1950s .
 Stalin agreed to give France a zone but it had to come from the American or British zones and not the Soviet zone . Stalin agreed that France would have to have a zone in the zone .
 The American, British, and French zones joined in 1949 as the Federal Republic of Germany and the Soviet zone became the German Democratic Republic . The Soviet zone was renamed the German Socialist Republic .
 Germany paid reparations to France, Britain and Russia, in the form of dismantled factories, forced labor, and shipments of coal . ReparatiGn.s Germany paid the reparations in the 1930s and '60s .
 The United States settled for confiscating German patents and German owned property in the U.S., mainly subsidiaries of German companies . The U.K. settled on confiscating some of the patents and owned property .
 In accordance with the Paris Peace Treaties, 1947, payment of war reparations as assessed from the countries of Italy, Romania, Hungaiy, Bulgaria, and Finland . Reparations were paid in accordance with Paris peace Treaties .
 The Morgenthau Plan oi 1944 called for dividing Germany into two independent nations and stripping her of industrial resources required for war . The initial occupation plans proposed by the United States were harsn harsh .
 All heavy industry was to be dismantled or destroyed, the main industrial areas, were to be annexed . All heavy industrial areas were to have their industrial areas annexed . The main industrial area was to have been annexed .
 The Morgenthau Plan was never implemented per se, but its general economic philosophy did end up greatly influencing events in the United States .
 Germany had long been the industrial giant of Europe, and its poverty held back the general European recovery . Most notable were the Potsdam Conference, Joint Chiefs of Staff Directive 1067 .
 The continued scarcity in Germany also led to considerable expenses for the occupying powers, which were obligated to try and make up the most important shortfalls .
 The United States made a bold decision to help rebuild Europe after World War I . The U.S. learned a lesson from the aftermath of the war, and when Germany was tieated as a pariah, the United States helped rebuild Europe .
 Secretary of State George Marshall proposed the ""European Recovery Program,"" better Imown as the Marshall Plan . The plan called for the United States Congress to allocate billions of dollars for reconstruction of Europe .
 Bretton Woods system for international money management was put into effect after the war . Also as part of the effort to rebuild global . ;.,apitalisra and spur post-war reconstruction, the Bretton . Woods system was put in place after World War II .
 Large populations suddenly found themselves in hostile territory . Border revisions and population shifts were a result of the new borders drawn by victorious nations .
 The main benefactor of these border revisions was the Soviet Union, which expanded its borders at the expense of Germany, Finland, Poland, and Japan . The main beneficiary of these borders was the USSR .
 Poland was compensated for its losses to the Soviet Union by receiving parts of Germany east of the Oder-Neisse line, including industrial regions 27 ■ Silesia . Poland received parts of the Soviet-occupied area of Germany . Poland was also compensated for losses by receiving part of the
 The Gentian state of the Saar temporarily became a protectorate of France . The Saar was later returned to German administration .
 The number of Germans expelled totaled roughly 15 million, including 11 million from Germany proper and 3,500,000 from the Sudetenland . Germany officially states that 2,100,000 of thesexpelled lost their lives due to violence on the part of the Russians, Polish
 The League of Nations had failed to actively prevent the war, in 1945 a ncvv international body was considered and then created; The United Nations. United Nations .
 The UN operates within the parameters of the United Nations Charter . The reason for the UN’s formation is outlined in the Preamble to the Uraled Nations Charter, according to the UN .
 Unlike its predecessor, the U.N. has taken a more active role in the world, such as fighting diseases and providing humanitarian aid to nations in distress .
 The Cold War was the protracted ideological, geopolitical, and economic struggle that emerged after World War n between the global superpowers of the Soviet Union and the United States, supported by their military alliance partners .
 The Soviet Union lasted from the end of World War II until December 25, 1991 . It was the period preceding the demise of the Soviet Union . It lasted between the end and end of the USSR .
 The global confrontation between the West and communism was popularly termed The Cold War . Direct hostilities never occurred between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 The ""w^ar"" took the fonn of an anr..s race involving nuclear and conventional weapons, military alliances, economic warfare and targeted trade embargos, propaganda and disinformation, espionage and espionage .
 The ntajor civil wars polarized along Cold War lines were the Greek Civil War, Korean War, Vietnam W’ar the war in Afghanistan, as well as the conflicts in Angola, El bab'ador, and Nicaragua . The war in Vietnam was the first to be polarized along
 During the Cold War there was concern that it would escalate into a full nuclear exchange with hundreds of millions killed . Hundreds of millions of millions were killed in a nuclear exchange .
 Both sides developed a deterrence policy that prevented problems from escalating beyond limited localities . The U.S. government says it will not tolerate violence in the future .
 Historians continue to debate the reasons for the Soviet collapse in the 1980s . It ended in the period between 1988 and 1991 w'ith the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the emergence of Solidarity, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact .
 Some fear that as one super-power emerges without the limitations imposed by a rival, the world may become a less secure place .
 Many people see the end of the Cold War as the triumph of democracy and freedom over totalitarian rule, state-mandated atheism, and a repressive communist system that claimed the lives of millions . While equal blame for Cold War tensions is often attributed both to the United States and the Soviet Union
 Tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States resumed following the conclusion of the Second World War in August 1945 . U.S. and Soviet Union fought in World War II .
 As the war came to a close, the Soviets laid claim to much of Eastern Europe and the Northern half of Korea . The Soviets claimed Eastern Europe, Northern Korea .
 They also attempted to occupy Japanese northernmost island of Hokkaido . They lent logistic and miiitaiy' support to Mao Zedong in his efforts to overthrow the Chinese Nationalist forces .
 Tensions between the Soviet Union and the Western powers escalated in 1945-1947 . Stalin's plans to consolidate Soviet control of Central and Eastern Europe became maniftestly clear . Tensions escalated in Potsdam, Yalta, and Tehran .
 Winston Churchill delivered his landmark speech at Westminster College in Fulton' Missouri in 1946 . Churchill lamented that an ""iron curtain"" had descended on Eastern Europe . Churchill's speech was held in 1946 in Fulton, Missouri .
 Historians interpret the Soviet Union’s Cold War intentions in two different manners . The Soviet Union's intentions in the Cold War have been interpreted differently by historians .
 One emphasizes the primacy of communist ideology and communism's foundational intent, as outlined in the Communist Manifesto, to establish global hegemony . Another emphasizes the Primacy of Communist ideology and Communism's intent .
 The roots of the ideological clashes can be seen in Marx's and Engels writings . Lenin succeeded in building communism into a political reality through the Bolshevik seizure of power in the Russian Revolution of 1917 .
 Walter LaFeber stresses Russia's historic interests, going back to the Czarist years when the U.S. and Russia became rivals . Walter LeFeber: The United States and Russia have historic interests in each other .
 From 1933 to 1939 the U.S. and the Soviet Union experienced detente but relations were not friendly . Relations between the United States and Russia was not friendly in the 1930s .
 Congress never voted to approve any sort of alliance and the wartime cooperation was never especially friendlv. Congress never votes to approve such an alliance . Congress was never very friendly to each other .
 For example, .losef Stalin w'as reluctant to allow American forces to use Soviet bases . Stalin was reluctant to let American forces use bases .
 Cooperation became increasingly strained by February 1945 at the Yalta Conference . Stalin intended to spread communism to Eastern Europe, perhaps to France and Italy .
 Some historians cite American expansionism as one of the roots of the Cold War . Some historians such as William Appleman Williams cite American economic expansionism .
 Historians use the Marshall Plan and its terms of conditions as evidence to back up their claims . These historians use Marshall Plan terms and conditions as proof of their claim .
 In 1946 the Soviet Union rejected a United States proposal for such control, which had been formulated by Bernard Baruch on the basis of an earlier report authored by Dean Acheson and David Lilienthal . Such an agreement would undermine the principle of national sovereignty .
 The end of the Cold War did not resolve the problem of international control of nuclear energy . It has re-emerged as a factor in the beginning of the Long War declared by the United States in 2006 as its official military doctrine .
 This period began the Cold War in 1947 and continued until the change in leadership for both superpowers in 1953 . Presidents Harry S Truman to Dwight D Eisenhower in the United States in the U.S. and Josef Stalin to Nikita Khrushchev in the Soviet Union .
 Notable events include the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, the Berlin Blockade and Berlin Airlift . The formation of NATO in 1949 and the Warsaw Pact m 1955, the formation of East and West Germany . superpower disengagement from Central Europe, the Chinese Civil War and the Korean War
 The American Marshall Plan intended to rebuild the European economy after the devastation incurred by the Second World War in order to thwart the political appeal of the radical left . The Marshall Plan was designed to rebuild Europe's economy .
 For Western Europe, economic aid ended the dollar shortage, stimulated private investment for reconstruction reconstruction and introduced new managerial techniques . Economic aid ended a dollar shortage for Western Europe in the 1950s .
 The plan rejected isolationism of the 1920s and integrated the North American and Western European economies . For the U.S., the plan rejected the isolationism and integrated North America .
 Truman Doctrine refers to the decision to support Greece and Turkey in the event of Soviet incursion . The Truman Doctrine was made following notice from Britain that she was no longer able to aid Greece in its civil war against communist activists .
 The Berlin blockade took place between June 1948 and July 1949 . The Soviets prevented overland access to the allied zones in Berlin . The blockade was an effort to obtain more post-World War II concessions .
 The Stalin Note was a plan for the reunification of Germany on the condition that it became a neutral state and that Western troops be withdrawn . All Western troops should be withdrawn from Germany .
 The Prague Spring was a brief period of hope, when the government of Alexander Dubcek started a process of liberalization, which ended abruptly when the Russian Soviets invaded Czechoslovakia . The spring of hope was briefly interrupted by the invasion of Soviet-occupied Russia .
 The Detente period of the Cold War was marked by mediation and comparative peace . Thaw and Detente, 1962-1979 were marked by mediations and relative peace . The thaw and detente period was a period of peace and mediation .
 Brandt forwarded the foreign 30 International Relations policy of Ostpolitik during his tenure in the Federal Republic of Germany . At its most reconciliatory, German Chancellor Willy Brandt was at its most reconciliatory policy .
 Warsaw Treaty between Poland and West Germany on December 7, 1970; Quadripartite or Four-Powers Agreement between the Soviet Union, United States, France and Great Britain on September 3, 1971; and a few eastwest German agreements including the Basic Treaty of December 21, 1972
 Limitations to reconciliation did exist, evidenced by the deposition of Walter Ulbricht by Erich Honecker as East German General Secretaiy on May 3, 1971 .
 The period between the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 and the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev as Soviet leader in 1985 was characterized by a marked ""freeze"" in relations between the superpowers after the ""thaw"" of the Detente period of the 1970s . The Second Cold
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 in support of an embryonic communist regime in that country led to international outcries . Western countries boycotted the 1980 Moscow Olympic Games by many Western countries in protest .
 The Soviet invasion led to a protracted conflict; which involved Pakistan, an erstwhile United States ally, in locked horns with the Soviet military might for over 12 years . The conflict involved Pakistan and the U.S. military might in a protracted war .
 NATO allies agreed in 1979 to continued Strategic Arms Limitation Talks to constrain the number of nuclear missiles for battlefield targets . NATO allies threatened to deploy' some five hundred cruise missiles and MGM-31 Pershing II missiles .
 The plamied deployment of rhe Pershing 11 met intense and widespread opposition from public opinion across Europe . The deployment met intense opposition and became the site of the largest demonstrations in several countries .
 Pershing II missiles deployed in Europe beginning in January 1984, and were withdrawn beginning in October 1988 . Pershing I missiles were deployed in the 1980s and '90s .
 The ""new conservatives"" or ""neoconservatives"" rebelled against both Nixon-era policies and the similar position of Jimmy Carter toward the Soviet Union . The new conservative movement was formed in the 1970s .
 Many clustered around hawkish Senator Henry' ""Scoop"" Jackson, a Democrat, and pressured President Carter into a more confrontational stance . President Carter was pressured by many to take a tougher stance .
 Eventually they aligned themselves with Ronald Reagan and the conservative wing of the Republicans, who promised to end Soviet expansionism . Eventually they aligned with Reagan and Reagan .
 Margaret Thatcher as British prime minister in 1979, followed by Ronald Reagan to A.MCrican presidency in 1980 . Ronald Reagan was elected to the presidency of the Western Bloc in 1980, following Thatcher's election as British Prime Minister .
 Other events included the Strategic Defense Initiative and the Solidarity Movement in Poland .
 Events included the Chernobyl accident in 1986, and the Autumn of Nations . One by one by one, communist regimes collapsed .
 This includes the famous fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the Soviet coup attempt of 1991 . The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 was the biggest coup attempt in Soviet history .
 Other noteworthy events include the implementation of the policies of glasnost and perestroika, public discontent over the Soviet Union's war in Afghanistan, and the effects of the Chernobyl nuclear plant accident in 1986 .
 Under Gorbachev, relatively young reform-oriented teclinocrats rapidly consolidated power, providing new momentum for political and economic liberalization . The impetus for cultivating wanner relations and trade with the West was the impetus .
 Ronald Reagan surprised the neoconservatives by meeting with Gorbachev in Geneva, Switzerland in 1985 and Reykjavik, Iceland in 1986 . Meanwhile, in his second term, Reagan surprised Reagan by meeting in Geneva and Iceland .
 The latter meeting focused on continued discussions around scaling back the intermediate missile arsenals in Europe .
 Gorbachev's efforts to boost production of consumer goods and reform the stagnating economy in an extremely precarious state . The twin burdens of the Cold War arms race on one hand and the provision of large sums of foreign and military aid, upon which the socialist allies had grown to expect,
 Gorbachev made it impossible for him to reassert central control over Warsaw Pact member states . The result was a dual approach of cooperation with the west and economic restructuring perestroika and democratization .
 Beginning in 1989 Eastern Europe's communist governments toppled one after another . The fall of Eastern Europe began in 1989 .
 In Poland, Hungary, and Bulgaria reforms in the government, in Poland under pressure from Solidarity, prompted a peaceful end to communist rule and democratization . In Hungary, Hungary and Bulgaria, reforms prompted the end of communist rule .
 Mass-demonstrations succeeded in ousting communists from Czechoslovakia and East Germany . The Berlin Wall was opened and subsequently brought down in November 1989 . Elsewhere, mass-demonstration helped to oust the communists from the communist state .
 In Romania a popular uprising deposed the Nicolae Ceaujescu regime during December and led to his execution on Christmas Day later that year . In Romania, the uprising led to the death of the then-deposed regime leader .
 Conservatives often argue that one major cause of the demise of the Soviet Union was the massive fiscal spending on military technology . The Soviets saw as necessary in response to NATO's increased armament of the 1980s . Conservatives argue that the Soviets saw their spending on technology as necessary .
 Soviet efforts to keep up with NATO military expenditures resulted in massive economic disruption and the effective bankruptcy of the Soviet economy, the authors say . The Soviet economy had always labored to keep pace with its western counterparts .
 The Soviets were a decade behind the West in computers and falling further behind every year . The Soviets are now in the world's most advanced computers, falling further further behind each year .
 The critics of the USSR state that computerized military technology was advancing at such a pace that the Soviets were simply incapable of keeping up . Even by sacrificing more of the already weak civilian economy, the Soviets sacrificed even more .
 The arms race, both nuclear and conventional, was too much for the underdeveloped Soviet economy of the time . According to 32 International Relations to the critics, the arms race is too much .
 Ronald Reagan is seen by conservatives as the man who 'won' the Cold War indirectly through his escalation of the arms race . For this reason Ronald Reagan was seen by miany conservatives as . Reagan is now seen by some as the 'winner' of the Cold .
 The proximate cause for the end of the Cold War was Mikhail Gorbachev's decision, publicized in 1988, to repudiate the Leonid Brezhnev doctrine that any threat to a socialist state was a threat to ail socialist states .
 The Soviet Union provided little infrastructure help for its Eastern European satellites . But they did receive substantial military assistance in the form of funds, material and control .
 Their integration into the inefficient military'-oricnted economy of the Soviet Union caused severe readjustment problems after the fall of the USSR .
 Research shows that the fall of the USSR was accompanied by a dramatic decline in total warfare, interstate wars, ethnic wars, revolutionary wars, and the number of refugees and displaced persons . The fall of Soviet Russia led to an increase in democratic states .
 This resulted in substantial scientific discoveries in many technological and military fields . This led to substantial scientific research in many military and technological fields .
 The idea was that the Western bloc would not attack the Eastern bloc or vice versa, because both sides had more than enough nuclear weapons to reduce each other out of existence and to make the entire planet uninhabitable .
 Launching an attack on either party would be suicidal and so neither would attempt it . Neither party would attempt to attack either side of the border .
 A first strike would aim to degrade the enemy's nuclear forces to such an extent that the retaliatoiy^ response would involve ""acceptable"" losses . With increasing numbers and accuracy of delivery systems, particularly in the closing stages of the Cold War, the possibility of a first strike
 Following the Cold War, Russia cut military spending dramatically, but adjustment was wrenching . The military-industrial sector had previously employed crS of every five Soviet adults .
 After Russia embarked on capitalist economic reforms in the 1990s, it suffered a financial crisis and a recession more severe than the United States and Germany had experienced during the Great Depression . Russia's economic crisis in 1990s was the worst since the U.S. and Germany's Great Depression in
 Russian living standards have worsened overall in the post-Cold War years . Russia's economy has resumed growth since 1999, but living standards haven't improved .
 The post-Cold War world is widely considered as unipolar, with the United States the sole remaining superpower . After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the world is considered unipolar .
 The Cold War institutionalized a global commitment to huge peacetime military-industrial complexes . Large-scale military funding of science was also institutionalized in the Cold War era .
 Military expenditures by the U.S. during the Cold War years were estimated to have been $8 trillion . Nearly 100,000 Americans lost their lives in the Korean and Vietnam War .
 Millions died in the superpowers' proxy wars around the globe, most notably in Southeast Asia . In addition to the loss of life by uniformed soldiers, millions died in proxy wars in the world .
 Most of the proxy wars and subsidies for local conflicts ended along with the Cold War . The incidence of interstate wars, ethnic wars, revolutionary wars, as well as refugee and displaced persons crises has declined sharply in the post-Cold War years .
 The legacy of Cold War conflict, however, is not always easily erased, as many of the economic and social tensions that were exploited to fuel Cold War competition in parts of the Third World remain acute .
 The breakdown of state control in a number of areas formerly ruled by Communist governments has produced new civil and ethnic conflicts, particularly in the former Yugoslavia . The breakdown in state control has produced a series of new civil conflicts .
 In Eastern Europe, the end of the Cold War has ushered in an era of economic growth and a large increase in the number of liberal democracies, while in other parts of the world, such as Afghanistan, independence was accompanied by state failure .
 Many specific nuclear legacies can be identified from the Cold War . Nuclear legacies are still visible in the United States .
 Some are benign, such as the ensuing era of comparative peace and prosperity . Others are the availability of new technologies for nuclear power and energy, and use of radiation for improving medical treatment and health .
 Radiation and other nuclear processes have all benefited from the carefully managed application of radiation . Environmental remediation, industrial production, research science, and technology development have all benefit from the application of nuclear processes .
 Despite termination of Cold War, military development and spending has continued . Military development has continued, particularly in the deployment of nuclear-armed ballistic missiles and defensive systems .
 Other nations not previously acknowledged as nuclearweapons states have developed and tested nuclear-explosive devices . Other nations have also tested nuclear weapons .
 Some chemical and biological weapons that were developed during the Cold War are still around . Many are being demilitarized, although many are still demilitated .
 The risk of nuclear and radiological terrorism by possible sub-national organizations'or individuals is now a major concern . The risk is now the biggest concern for the U.S.
 The international nonproproliferation regime inherited from the Cold War still provides disincentives and safeguards against national or sub-national access to nuclear materials and facilities .
 Formal and informal measures and processes have effectively slowed national incentives and the tempo of international nuclear-weapons proliferation, experts say . They say .
 Numerous and beneficial uses of nuclear energy have evolved, all of which require structured safeguards to prevent malevolent use . Nuclear energy is one of the most peaceful forms of energy .
 Commercial nuclear-reactor operation and construction have persisted, with some notable increase in worldwide energy production . Commercial nuclear reactors have been built around the world .
 The management of nuclear waste remains somewhat unresolved, depending very much on government policies . Government policies are very important in managing nuclear waste, experts say .
 Nuclear weapons are becoming surplus to national military interests, they are slowly being dismantled . Some fissile material is being recycled to fuel civilian nuclear-reactors . Some nuclear weapons are being recycled for civilian reactors .
 Cold War brought forth some significant involuntary exposures to high-level radiation . The military and non-military exploitation of nuclear fission brought forth significant involuntary exposure .
 The atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki caused previously unimagined destruction through blast and fire, as well as acute and lingering radiation . The atomic bombs were caused by intense blast, fire and radiation .
 Radiation exposure to radiation above normal background levels occurred to scientists, technicians, military personnel, civilians, and animals . It occurred during many decades of nuclear weapons production and testing .
 Several significant radiation-related accidents occurred at military and civilian nuclear reactors and facilities, causing direct fatalities, as well as involuntary occupational and public exposures .
 The medical effects of radiation exposure are now better understood than they were during the Cold War . Because of numerous diagnostic and epidemiological studies have since been conducted, the medical effects are better understood .
 Large and involuntary doses and effects from radiation, chemical, and biological agents have been documented . Comparatively large and involuntary dose and effects of radiation and chemical agents .
 Some exposures were from deliberate human medical experiments and some from residues of highly toxic materials at contaminated sites . Some exposures may have been from deliberate medical experiments .
 Nuclear facilities and residual products of the Cold War are mostly contained within secure boundaries . However, that is not necessarily the case for nuclear-propelled submarines that have sunk at sea .
 Nuclear-weapons states have inherited substantial responsibilities in protecting and stabilizing their nuclear forces . The nation's nuclear weapons are responsible for national and international security . The U.S. has inherited substantial responsibility to protect and stabilise its nuclear forces.
 An appropriate continuing level of security is necessary through all life-cycle phases, from production to decommissioning, officials say . The U.S. government says it is committed to the U.N. commitment to the project .
 "The entire military nuclear infrastructure requires protection, and that requires a commensurate allocation of funding," he says . "In addition, the entire military . nuclear infrastructure . requires protection," he adds .
 Having once had widespread overseas nuclear bases and facilities, both the U.S. and the former Soviet Union have inherited particular responsibilities and costs .
 All nuclear-weapons states had developed not only production and servicing facilities, but also sometimes extensive military staging and storage . Moreover, all nuclear-armed states have developed extensive military facilities .
 Although the Cold War has been defused, domestic basing and overseas deployment of nuclear weapons has not ended . Domestic basing, overseas deployment and nuclear weapons have not ended, experts say .
 The nuclear-weapon states remain in various reduced but palpable conditions of defensive alert . Moreover, the nuclear-weapons states are still on alert .
 Risks of deliberate, accidental, or unauthorized nuclear devastation remain . Risks remain .
 Terrorists and hackers continue to interfere with nuclear stability and confidence, says N.E.I. Report .
 World inventories of weapons-grade fissile materials are substantial, much greater than now needed for military purposes . Inventories are substantial and much more needed than now used by military purposes, experts say .
 Until these materials can be demilitarized, they need to be security safeguarded . The materials must be safeguarded until they are fully demilitated .
 In the meantime, sensitive materials have to be safely and securely stored, pending their conversion to non-military use .
 The Cold War came to an unprepared and relatively sudden end in the Cold War . The successor states of the former Soviet Union were in no position to finance and maintain secure safeguards . In particular, the successor states were not in any position to fund and maintain safeguards .
 National security and defense for nuclear-weapons states must be frequently reevaluated . National security must be constantly reevalued, experts say .
 The international arms-control treaty and verification regime inherited from the Cold War is only slowly being updated to reflect the realities of a new international security environment . It is not the first time that arms control treaty has been updated .
 Internal national-security military postures still dominate behavior among sovereign nations . Military legacies still dominate national security postures . Military postures dominate behavior of sovereign nations.
 The former superpowers have not formally consummately consummated their standdown from Cold War military equipoise . Former superpowers still have no formal standdown .
 Strategic and tactical nuclear and conventional forces remain at levels comparatively high for a peacetime environment . The U.S. remains at high levels for the purposes of peacetime .
 Localized conflicts and tensions have replaced the fdhner bilateral nuclear confrontation . Localized conflict and tensions replaced the nuclear confrontation with localized conflicts .
 As a lingering result, large inventories of nuclear weapons and facilities remain . Large inventories remain as a result .
 Some are being recycled, dismanted, or recovered as valuable substances . Some of the material is being used as a valuable substance .
 Military policies and strategies are slowly being modified to reflect the increasing interval without major confrontation . Military policies are slowly changing to reflect an increase in the absence of major military confrontations .
 A mutual danger coexists for accidental, misjudged, or miscalculated incidents or warfare . Because of large extant inventories of weapons, fissile materials, and rapidresponse delivery systems, a mutual danger is possible .
 A few 36 nations have attempted or succeeded in carrying out nuclear-explosive tests and thus creating their own nuclear deterrence . In the meantime, they have not abandoned their dependency on nuclear deterrence, while a few 36 more nations have carried out nuclear tests .
 During the Cold War, an international fabric of arms-control constraint had evolved . Much of it carried over as a beneficial heritage with institutional mechanisms for multi-lateral or international function .
 Little has since been done to modernize or expand the treaty regimes that were aimed at mutual agreement regarding production, testing, inventories, and stabilization .
 Institutional legacies include institutional structures of government and functionality that have less to do directly divith military or security factors, but more to do with underlying public attitudes and risks .
 These institutional structures and perceptions have had their own challenges and adjustments after the Cold War . The Cold War has had its own challenges, including how to deal with it .
 Strong impressions made and continue to affect national psyche as a result of perilously close brushes with all-out nuclear warfare . Strong impressions were made and continues to affect nation's psyche .
 In some cases this had resulted in aversion to warfare, in other cases to callousness regarding nuclear threats . In others, it has resulted in a callous attitude to the threat of nuclear weapons .
 Peaceful applications of nuclear energy received a stigma still difficult to exorcize . Peaceful uses of nuclear power received a stigmatized stigma still hard to exorcise . Nuclear energy has been a source of controversy for decades .
 Heightened fear of nuclear risk can result in resistance to military drawdown, experts say . Heightened fears of nuclear weapons could lead to resistance to drawdown from military .
 What at one time was fastidious attention regarding nuclear security, secrecy, and safety could deteriorate to lax attitudes . "Fastidious attention on nuclear security and secrecy may deteriorate"
 Public impressions and insecurities gained during the Cold War could carry over to the peace ime environment . The Cold War was a period of tension between the U.S. and the West .
 Continuing support for the weapons establishment depends on public support, despite diminished threats to national security . The weapons establishment relies heavily on the support of the U.S. government .
 Agencies and departments created during a time of crisis no longer need to fill the same role . Agencies were created during the times of crisis . They are no longer needed to fill that role .
 In fact, these same institutional structures can be modified to carry out new missions associated with the cleanup and storage of highly dangerous and toxic materials .
 The policies and practices that relied on government secrecy are no longer operable in peacetime . The policies, practices that rely on secrecy, no longer operateable in a peacetime environment, officials say .
 There are misunderstandings that were prominent during the Cold War now need clarification . Also need clarification so that closure can be reached, especially about the ability to demilitarize and peacefully use nuclear materials .
 "Underhanded practices in the name of national security are no longer countenanced," says President Obama . Underhanded practices will no longer be tolerated, he says .
 The existence of many third-world insurgencies and interventions is now being uncovered as the former cloak of secrecy unveils or their perpetrators confesses .
 Cold War was a huge fiscal mortgage placed on many domestic economies . Cold War led to huge fiscal burden placed on domestic economies. Cold War's economic legacies still remain a major problem .
 Financial obligations included those necessary to avoid further dislocations while the change took place from a wartime footing to a peacetime environment . Financial obligations were those necessary for the change .
 37 new obligations were acquired by nations that were once bystanders to the East-West confrontation . Highly dependent institutional frameworks were to be restructured, and 37 .
 In the wake of the Cold War, freed or newly-founded nations inherited expenses, commitments, and resources for which they were not prepared . The Cold War was the first time freed nations had to deal with the challenges they faced .
 The successor states also found themselves with contemporary national-security burdens. and substantial environmental contamination legacies . New or revised civilian economies had to be instituted. and new national security burdens .
 Both Russia and the U.S. ended up with substantial economic liabilities . The superpowers carried much of the confrontational burden, both Russia and U.K. have .
 The nation state is a state that self-identifies as denving its political legitimacy from serving as a sovereign entity for a nation . Nation state is the state that serves as an entity that is not a nation but a sovereign territorial unit . A nation state can also be a state of
 The state is a political and geopolitical entity; the nation is a cultural and/or ethnic entity . The nation is an ethnic and political entity; it is also a political, geopolitical entity .
 The term ""nation state"" implies that the two geographically coincide, which distinguishes the nation state from the other types of state, which historically preceded it . The term "nation state" is used to refer to the state of a nation state .
 The origins and early history of nation states are disputed . History and origins of nations is disputed .
 For nationalists, the answer is that the nation existed first, nationalist movements arose to present its legitimate demand for sovereignty, and the nation state met that demand . The nation state is a state that meets that demand, and it is a nation state .
 Some see the national identity largely as a product of government policy to unify and modernise an already existing state . Some ""modernisation theories" of nationalism see national identity as a result of government policies .
 Most theories see the nation state as an 1800s European phenomenon, facilitated by developments such as mass literacy and the early mass media .
 Historians note the emergence of a relatively unified state, and a sense of common identity, in Portugal and the Dutch Republic . However, historians also note the early emergence of the relatively unified states, and the sense of a common identity .
 In France, Eric Hobsbawm argues the French state preceded the formation of the French people . He argues that the state of France pre-formed the French nation .
 Hobsbawm considers that the state made the French nation, not French nationalism . French nationalism emerged at the end of the 19th century, the time of the Dreyfus Affair, he says .
 During the Italian unification, the number of people speaking the Italian language was even lower . During the unification of Italy, there were fewer people speaking Italian language .
 The French state promoted the unification of various dialects and languages into the French language .
 The introduction of conscription and the Third Republic's 1880s laws on public instruction, facilitated the creation of a national identity, under this theory, under the theory .
 The ""state-driven" theories of the origin of nation states tend to emphasise a few specific states, such as England and its rival France .
 These states expanded from core regions, and developed a national consciousness and sense of national identity . These areas experienced a revival of interest in the national culture in the 19th century, leading to the creation of autonomist movements in the 20th century .
 Some nation states, such as Germany or Italy, came into existence partly as a result of political campaigns by nationalists, during the 19th century .
 In both cases, the territory was previously divided among other states, some of them veiy small .
 The sense of common identity was at first a cultural movement, such as in the Volkisch movement in German-speaking states . It rapidly acquired a political significance, becoming a political movement .
 In these cases, the nationalist sentiment and the nationalist movement clearly precede the unification of the German and Italian nation states . The nationalist movement was formed in Germany and Italy .
 Historians Hans Kohn, Liah Greenfeld, Philip White and others have classified nations such as Germany or Italy as ethnic nations or ethnic nationalities .
 'state-driven' national unifications, such as in France, England or China, are more likely to flourish in multiethnic societies . Multiethnic society produces a traditional national heritage of civic nations, or territory-based nationalities .
 The balance of power depends upon clearly defined, centrally controlled, independent entities, whether empires or nation states, which recognise each other's sovereignty and territory . It depends on clearly defined and centrally controlled entities .
 The nation state received a philosophical underpinning in the era of Romanticism, at first as the 'natural' expression of the individual peoples . It was first thought to be a 'natural expression' of individual peoples.
 The increasing emphasis during the 19th century on the ethnic and racial origins of the nation, led to a redefinition of the state in these terms . The nation state was redefined in the terms of national identity in the late 1800s .
 Racism in Boulainvilliers's theories was inherently antipatriotic and antinationalist . Racism joined itself with colonialist imperialism and colonialist colonialism, most notably in pan-Germanic movements .
 The relation between racism and ethnic nationalism reached its height in the 1900s fascism and Nazism . It was the height of the relationship between fascism and the rise of ethnic nationalism .
 Faseist states such as early Nazi Germany were qualitatively different from nonfascist nation states . The specific combination of 'nation' and 'state' was used in laws like the 1935 Nuremberg laws .
 Minorities who are not part of the Volk have no authentic or legitimate role in such a state . Minorities, who do not belong to such a nation, should not be part of it, he says .
 In Germany, neither Jews nor the Roma were considered part of the Volk, and were specifically targeted for persecution . Neither Jews nor Roma were part of Germany's Volk . The Roma were targeted specifically for persecution.
 In recent years, the nation state's claim to absolute sovereignty within its borders has been much criticised . The claim of absolute sovereignty in the country has been criticised .
 A global political system based on international agreements and supra-national blocs characterized the post-war era . The post-WWII era was dominated by the rise of the Cold War .
 Non-state actors are seen as eroding the economic and political power of nation states . This could lead to their eventual disappearance, potentially leading to the disappearance of nations .
 In Europe, in the 18th century, the classic non-national states were the multiethnic empires, and smaller states at what would now be called sub-national level .
 The multi-ethnic empire was a monarchy ruled by a king, emperor or sultan . It was ruled by an emperor, sultan, king or king .
 The population belonged to many ethnic groups, and they spoke many languages . The population of the population was very diverse, with many languages.
 The empire was dominated by one ethnic group, and their language was usually the language of public administration . Their language was used in the empire's administration .
 This type of state is not specifically European; such empires existed on all continents, except Australia and Antarctica . Such empires existed in all continents except Antarctica, excepting Australia .
 Some smaller European states were not so ethnically diverse, but were also dynastic states, ruled by a royal house . Some of the smaller European countries were ruled by royal houses .
 Their territory could expand by intermarriage or merge with another state when the dynasty merged . The kingdom could also expand by royal intermarriage . The state could also merge with other states .
 In some parts of Europe, notably Germany, very small territorial units existed . Small territorial units were created in some areas of Europe .
 They were recognised by their neighbours as independent, and had their own government and laws . They are recognised as independent and recognised by the neighbours .
 Some were ruled by princes or other hereditary rulers, some by bishops or abbots . Some were governed by bishops, abbots or bishops . Others ruled by kings or princes .
 In some cases these states were simply overthrown by nationalist uprisings in the 19th century . Some states were overthrown in some cases by nationalists in the late 1800s .
 Liberal ideas of free trade played a role in German unification, which was preceded by customs union, the Zollverein . Free trade was a key part of the unification of Germany .
 Austro-Prussian War, and the German alliances in the Franco-German War, were decisive in the unification .
 Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire broke up after the First V/orld War . The Russian Empire became the Soviet Union, after the Russian Civil War .
 Nation states have their own characteristics, differing from those of the prenational states . Characteristics of the nation state differ from pre-nations states .
 No nation would swap territory with other states simply because of the king's daughter got married . No nation's territory would be swapped simply for political reasons, such as because the queen's daughter was married .
 The most noticeable characteristic is the degree to which nation states use the state as an instrument of national unity, in economic, social and cultural life . The state is a powerful instrument of unity in economic and social life .
 The nation state promoted economic unity, by abolishing internal customs and tolls . The state abolished internal customs, including tolls, to promote economic unity .
 In Germany, that process, the creation of the Zollverein, preceded formal national unity . In Germany it was created by the Nazis in the early 1930s .
 Nation states typically have a policy to create and maintain a national transportation infrastructure, facilitating trade and travel . Nation states have a national transport infrastructure .
 In 19th-century Europe, the expansion of the rail transpoit networks was at first largely a matter for private railway companies, but gradually came under control of the national governments .
 The French 40 International Relations rail network is often seen as a reflection of the centralised French nation state, which directed its construction . The network has main lines radiating from Paris to all comers of France .
 Nation states continue to build, for instance, specifically, specifically national motorway networks .
 Trans-European Networks are a recent innovation in transnational infrastructure . Transnational infrastructure programmes, such as the Trans-EU Networks, are a new innovation . Trans-Europe Networks is a transnational network of transnational networks .
 After the 19th-century triumph of the nation state in Europe, regional identity was subordinate to national identity . In regions such as Alsace-Lorraine, Catalonia, Brittany, Sicily, Sardinia and Corsica, Catalonia and Catalonia, Catalonia were subordinate .
 In many cases, the regional administration was also subordinated to central government . The regional government was often subordinate to the government .
 This process was partially reversed from the 1970s onward, with the introduction of various forms of regional autonomy, in formerly centralised states such as France . This process has been partially reversed since the 1960s .
 The creation of national systems of compulsory primary education and a relatively uniform curriculum in secondary schools, was the most effective instrument in the spread of the national languages .
 The schools also taught national history, often in a propagandistic and mythologised version, and some nation states still teach this kind of history .
 Language and cultural policy was sometimes negative, aimed at the suppression of non-national elements . Policy was aimed at suppressing non-nation elements in the country .
 Language prohibitions were sometimes used to accelerate the adoption of national languages, and the decline of minority languages, see Germanisation . Language prohibitions have been used in the past to accelerate language adoption .
 In some cases, these policies triggered bitter conflicts and further ethnic separatism . Some of these policies sparked bitter conflicts .
 Where it worked, the cultural uniformity and homogeneity of the population increased . But where it worked it was less uniformed and more homogeneous, it increased .
 The Alsace region changed hands four times between 1870 and 1945 . Both sides have divergent language policies and educational systems .
 In some cases, the geographic boundaries of an ethnic population and a political state largely coincide . Examples: The nation state in practice . In some instances, the borders of ethnic populations and political states overlap .
 In these cases, there is little immigration or emigration, few members of the ""home"" ethnicity living in other countries . Few members of ethnic minorities, and few . members of "home" ethnicity living abroad .
 The vast majority of the population is ethnically Albanian at about 98.6% . The majority consists of a few small ethnic minorities, with the remainder consisting of a small minority .
 The vast majority of Armenia's population consists of ethnic Armenians at about 98% of the population . The remainder consists of a few small ethnic minorities, with the remainder consisting of a small minority .
 The vast majority ethnic group of Bangladesh are the Bengali people, comprising 98% of the population . The remainder of the country consists of mostly Bihari migrants and indigenous tribal groups .
 Bangladeshi society is to a great extent linguistically and culturally homogeneous, with very small populations of foreign expatriates and workers . There is a substantial number of Bengali workers living abroad . Bangladesh has a very small population of foreign workers and expats .
 The vast majority of Egypt’s population consists of ethnic Egyptians at about 99% of the population . The remainder consists of a few small ethnic minorities, as well as refugees or asylum seekers .
 Modem Egyptian identity is closely tied to the geography of Egypt and its long history, its development over the centuries saw overlapping or conflicting ideologies . The identity of the Egyptian people has been closely linked to its history .
 Egyptians are an Arabicspeaking people, not a necessary attribute of or prop for their national political being . Egypt is an Arab-speaking people, but that aspect constitutes for Egyptians a cultural dimension of identity .
 The Hungarians or the Magyar people consist of about 95% of the population, with a small Roma and German minority: see Demographics of Hungary . The Hungarian population is 95% .
 Iceland's national culture and language are found only in Iceland . The inhabitants are ethnically related to other Scandinavian groups . The national culture is found in Iceland and Iceland .
 Japan has a small number of minorities such as Ryukyu peoples, Koreans and Chinese . The island of Hokkaido has an indigenous Ainu minority .
 Lesotho's ethno-linguistic structure consists almost entirely of the Basotho , a Bantu-speaking people . About 99.7% of the population of Lesothotho are Basothos .
 The vast majority of the population is ethnically Dhivehi at about 98% . The remainder consists of foreign workers; there are no indigenous ethnic minorities . The majority of people in the country are ethnically Divehi .
 The vast majority of the population is ethnically Maltese at about 95.3% . The remainder consists of a few small ethnic minorities . The majority of Maltese are Maltese .
 The Portuguese nation has occupied the same territory since the romanization or latinization of the native population during the Roman era . Although surrounded by other lands and people, the Portuguese nation is surrounded by the same land .
 Most Berber/Arab people and the Jews were expelled from the Iberian Peninsula during the Reconquista and the repopulation by Christians . The Jews and Berbers were expelled during the reconquista of Spain .
 Sammarinese make up about 97% of the population and all speak Italian . Sammarines are ethnically and linguisticially identical to Italians . Sammmarinese speak Italian and ethnically identical to Italian .
 The state has a population of approximately 30,000, including 1,000 foreigners, most of whom are Italians . Most of the state's population is Italian, and most foreigners are Italian .
 The vast majority of Swazi population is ethnically Swazi at about 98.6% of the population . The remainder consists of a few small ethnic minorities . The majority of population is Swazi .
 The notion of a unifying ""national identity"" also extends to countries that host multiple ethnic or language groups, such as India and China . The idea of unifying national identity is also seen in China and India .
 Switzerland is constitutionally a confederation of cantons, and has four official languages . But it has also a 'Swiss' national identity, a national history and a classic national hero, Wilhelm Tell .
 Innumerable conflicts have arisen where political boundaries did not correspond to ethnic or cultural boundaries . Innumerable political boundaries have not corresponded to ethnic, cultural boundaries, says historian .
 Hatay Province was transferred to Turkey from S)Tia after the majority of the majority-Turkish population complained of mistreatment .
 The traditional homeland of the Kurdish people extends between northern Iraq, southeastern Turkey, and western Iran . Kurdish people live in Turkey, Iraq, Turkey and Iran .
 Some inhabitants call for the creation of an independent Kurdistan, citing mistreatment by the Turkish and Iraqi governments . Some of the region's inhabitants say they are mistreated by their governments .
 After in the Tito era, nationalism was appealed to for uniting South Slav peoples . After in Tito's era, nationalists appealed to uniting the South Slavs .
 These conflicts were largely about creating a 43 new political framework of states, each of which would be ethnically and politically homogeneous . Each of the 43 states would have their own ethnic and political homogeneous regions .
 Serbians, Croatians and Bosnians insisted they were ethnically distinct . Many communities had a long history of intermarriage . Serbians and Croatians had a history of  intermarriage.
 Slovenia, Croatia and Serbia could be classified as nation states per se . Macedonia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina are multinational states . Croatia, Slovenia and Croatia could be considered nation states .
 Belgium is a classic example of an artificial state that is not a nation state . Belgium is one of the most artificial states in the world, not a country state .
 The state was formed by secession from the United Kingdom of the Netherlands in 1830 . It served as a buffer state between the European powers France, Prussia, the UK and the Netherlands until World War I . Belgium is divided between the Flemings, the French-speaking and the German
 The Walloon population in the south speaks French and/or German . The Flemish population in north speaks Flemis . Walloons in the north speak Flemisch . The Walloons speak French and German .
 There is a strong separatist movement espoused by the political parties, Vlaams Belang and Nieuw-Vlaamse Alliantie . The Flemish identity is also ethnic and cultural, and there is strong separatist sentiment .
 The Francophone Walloon identity of Belgium is linguistically distinct and regionalist . Walloon is a French-speaking Walloon province of Belgium . The identity of the Walloon population is a regionalist and Francophone .
 German-speaking community of Belgium annexed from Prussia in 1920, and re-annexed by Germany in 1940-1944 . There is also unitary Belgian nationalism, several versions of a Greater Netherlands ideal .
 These ideologies are all very marginal and politically insignificant during elections . However these ideologies are very marginal, politically insignificant .
 China covers a large geographic area and uses the concept of ""Zhonghua minzu" or Chinese nationality, in the sense of ethnic groups . China also recognizes the majority Han ethnic group, and no fewer than 55 ethnic national minorities .
 The United Kingdom is a complex example of a nation state, due to its ""countries within a country"" status . The United States is one of the most complex nations in the world .
 The UK is a unitary state formed by the merger of two independent kingdoms, the Kingdom of England and Scotland . The Treaty of Union ensured the continuation of distinct features of each state, including separate legal systems and national churches .
 The Estonian state which shall guarantee the preservation of the Estonian natiwi, language and culture through the ages . Estonian language, culture and culture will be preserved through the years .
 Israel was founded as a Jewish state in 1948 . Basic Laws describe it as both a Jewish and a democratic state . Israel's Basic Laws say it is both Jewish and democratic .
 According to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics, 75.7% of Israel's population is Jewish . According to Israel's central bureau of statistics, 75% of the country's population are Jewish .
 Arabs, who make up 20.4% of the population, are the largest ethnic minority in Israel . Arabs make up about 20% of Israel's Arab population . Arabs are Israel's largest Arab minority .
 Armenians, Circassians, Assyrians, Samaritans, and persons of some Jewish heritage . Israel also has very small communities of Armenians and Assyrians .
 These communities are very small, and usually number only in the hundreds or thousands . However, these communities are small, with only hundreds of thousands of people .
 The most obvious deviation from the ideal of 'one nation, one state', is the presence of minorities, especially ethnic minorities, which are clearly not members of the majority nation . Minorities are the obvious deviation .
 Ethnic nationalist definition of a nation is necessarily exclusive; ethnic nations typically do not have open membership . Ethnic nations typically don't have an open membership.
 In most cases, there is a clear idea that surrounding nations are different, and that includes members of those who live on the 'wrong side' of the border .
 Historical examples of groups singled out as outsiders are the Roma and Jews in Europe .
 Negative responses to minorities within the nation state have ranged from cultural assimilation enforced by the state, to expulsion, persecution, violence, and extermination . Negative responses range from expulsion, violence or extermination .
 Many nation states accept specific minorities as being part of the nation . The term national minority is often used in this sense of being a national minority .
 They are now generally considered to be part of the German nation . They are accepted as such by the Federal Republic of Germany, which constitutionally guarantees cultural rights .
 Of the thousands of ethnic and cultural minorities in nation states across the world, only a few have this level of acceptance and protection . Only a few countries have a greater acceptance of the minority minority .
 Multiculturalism is an official policy in many states, establishing the ideal of peaceful existence among multiple ethnic, cultural, and linguistic groups . Multiculturalistism is a policy in the United States .
 When national boundaries do not match ethnic boundaries, ethnic tension, massacres and even genocide, sometimes has occurred historically . Ethnic tension and massacres have occurred in the Balkans and Central Asia, such as the Balkans .
 Ideally, the border of a nation state extends far enough to include all the members of the nation, and all of the national homeland . Irredentism is a form of nationalism that includes the borders of all the nation .
 In practice some of them always live on the 'wrong side' of the border . In practice, some of the 45-year-olds live in the wrong place .
 Irredentist claims are usually based on the fact that an identifiable part of the national group lives across the border . The claim is usually made by an identifiable national group living in the country .
 Claims include claims to territory where no members of that nation live at present, because they lived there in the past, or the national language is spoken in that region, the national culture has influenced it, or geographical unity with the existing territory .
 It is sometimes difficult to distinguish irredentism from pan-nationalism . Both claim that all members of an ethnic and cultural nation belong in one specific state .
 Various variants of Pan-Germanism have different ideas about what constituted Greater Germany . The term Grossdeutschland implied the inclusion of huge Slavic minorities from the Austro-Hungarian Empire .
 Typically, irredentist demands are at first made by members of non-state nationalist movements . The demands are usually made by groups not state nationalists .
 Attempts at annexation are always considered a casus belli, a cause for war . When they are adopted by a state, they typically result in tensions . Actual attempts to annexate are always seen as a cause of war .
 In many cases, such claims result in long-term hostile relations between neighbouring states . Such claims have led to long-lasting hostility between countries .
 Irredentist movements circulate maps of the claimed national territory, the greater nation state . The maps are circulated by the movement of nationalist movements .
 The territory, which is often much larger than the existing state, plays a central role in their propaganda .
 Irredentism should not be confused with claims to overseas colonies, which are not generally considered part of the national homeland . The country is not considered to be part of its homeland .
 French rule in Algeria unsuccessfully treated the colony as a department of France . The colony was a French colony under French rule .
 The concept of a nation state may disappear with the ever-increasingly interconnected nature of the world . It has been speculated by both proponents of globalization and various science fiction writers that the concept of nation states may disappear in the future .
 Such ideas are sometimes expressed around concepts of a world government . Such ideas have been expressed around the concept of world government.
 Another possibility is a societal collapse and move into communal anarchy or zero world government . Nation states no longer exist and government is done on the local level based on a global ethic of human rights .
 This falls into line with the concept of internationalism, which states that sovereignty is an outdated concept and a barrier to achieving peace and harmony in the world . Nation states are also a similar outdated concept .
 If the nation state begins to disappear, it may well be the direct or indirect resylt of globalization and internationalism . The nation state may disappear, but it may also be linked to internationalism and globalization .
 The two concepts state that sovereignty is an outdated concept . The existence of a nation state depends on 'untouchable' sovereignty, it is therefore reasonable to assume that. sovereignty is 'outdated' sovereignty .
 Globalization especially has helped to bring about the discussion about the disappearance of nation states . Global trade and the rise of the concepts of a 'global 46 International Relations citizen’ and a common identity have helped to reduce differences and 'distances' between individual nation states, especially with regards
 Balance of power in international relations is when there is parity or stability between competing forces . In international relations, a balance of power exists when there are parity, stability between rival forces . Balance power is a stability or parity of forces in the world .
 'Just equilibrium' is a term in international law for a 'just equilibrium' between the members of the family of nations . It expresses the doctrine intended to prevent any one nation from becoming sufficiently strong so as to enable it to enforce its will upon the rest .
 A state may choose to engage in either balancing or bandwagoning behavior . Within a balance of power system, a state can choose to either choose to be balanced or bandwagoned .
 In a time of war, the decision to balance or to bandwagon may well determine the survival of the state . In a war, balance or not balance the state may well decide its fate .
 This assertion has come under criticism from other schools of thought within the international relations field, such as the constructivists and political economists .
 A doctrine of equilibrium is as old as history, and was familiar to the ancients both as political theorists and as practical statesmen . Charles Davenant pointed out in his Essay on the Balance of Power, the principle involved in balancing of political power .
 In its essence it is no more than a precept of common sense, common sense and the instinct of selfpreservation . In its . essence, it's no more . than an instinct of . experience .
 The theory of Balance of Power has certain key aspects that have been agreed upon throughout the literature on the subject . More precisely, the theory of balance of power has certain aspects of it .
 Balance of Power theory states aim to secure their own safety, consistent with political realism or the realist world-view . The main objective of states, according to balance of power theory, is to secure its own safety .
 states reach an equilibrium because of this objective of self-preservation . Secondly, states reach equilibrium because they aim to protect themselves from harm . States reach equilibrium due to the objective of this .
 States by trying to avoid the dominance of one particular state, will ally themselves with other states until an equilibrium is reached . States will ally with each other to avoid being dominated by one state .
 An equilibrium between the various powers which form, the family of nations is essential to the very existence of any international law . As Professor L Oppenheim points out, an equilibrium between all powers is essential .
 In the absence of any central authority, the only sanction behind the code of rules established by custom or defined in treaties, known as 'international law' is the capacity of the powers to hold each other in check .
 If this system fails, nothing prevents any state sufficiently powerful from ignoring the law and acting solely according to its convenience and interests . Nothing stops any state from acting according to convenience or interests of its own .
 Francesco Sforza, Duke of Milan, was the first ruler to actively pursue such a policy . Historians have generally attributed the innovation to the Medici rulers of Florence whose praises were sung by Niccolo Machiavelli and Francesco Guicciardini .
 Universalism, which was the dominant direction of European international relations prior to the Peace of Westphalia, gave way to the doctrine of the balance of power . The doctrine of balance-power was the first doctrine of European power .
 The term gained significance after the Treaty of Utrecht in 1713, where it was specifically mentioned . The treaty was mentioned in the 1713 treaty .
 The theory of the balance of power was formulated as a fundamental principle of diplomacy . It was not until the 17th century when the science of international law assumed the discipline of structure, in the hands of Grotius and his successors .
 European states formed a sort of federal community, the fundamental condition of which was the preservation of a balance of power . No one state, or potentate, should be able absolutely to predominate and prescribe laws to the rest of Europe .
 It was held to be the interest, the right, and the duty of every power to interfere, even by force of arms, when any of the conditions of this settlement were infringed upon, or assailed by, any other member of the community . And, since all were equally
 This Taalance of power' principle, once formulated, became an axiom of political science . This is once a political science axiom, it has been axiomised by political scientists .
 Fenelon, in his Instructions, impressed the young Louis, due de Bourgogne, with the axiom . The young Louis was due to be born in France in 17th century .
 Frederick the Great proclaimed the ""balance of power"" principle in his Anti-Machiavel . Frederick declared the principle to the world . Frederick the First proclaimed the principle of balance of power .
 In 1806, Friedrich von Gentz re-stated it with admirable clarity, in Fragments on the Balance of Power . In the same year, he wrote a book on the balance of power in Germany, Germany and Austria .
 The principle formed the basis of the coalitions against Louis XFV and Napoleon, and the occasion, or the excuse, for most of the wars which Europe experienced between the Peace of Westphalia and the Congress of Vienna .
 During the greater part of the 19th century, the series of national upheavals which remodelled the map of Europe obscured the balance of power . During the 18th century Europe was at the centre of power in Europe .
 It underlay all the efforts of diplomacy to stay, or to direct, the elemental forces let loose by the French Revolution . Yet, it underlay efforts to stay or direct,  the elements of the revolution .
 In the revolution's aftermath, with the restoration of comparative calm, the principle once more emerged as the operative motive for the various political alliances, of which the ostensible object was the preservation of peace . In the aftermath of the revolution, the stability of the country was restored .
 It was to be pacific, mediating, favourable to a balance which should prevent any power from having a hegemony on the continent or controlling the Channel coasts . It was intended to be a pacific and mediating mediator .
 The naval security of England and the balance of power in Europe were the two great political principles which appeared in the 48 International Relations reign of Henry VIII . Henry VIII's reign was to create the greatness of England .
 In 1579 the first English translation of Guicciardini's Storia d'ltalia or History of Italy popularised Italian balance of power theory in England . The first translation of the book was published in 1579 .
 The balance of power phenomenon pervades international politics and is the central feature in the power struggle . Significance: Balance of power is central feature of power struggle in the world .
 Independent states as sovereign members are free to join or refrain from joining alliances and alignments as each seeks to maximize its security and to advance its national interest . It is the net effect, or result, produced by a state system in which the independent state is free to participate in alliances and
 Colonialism is the extension of a nation’s sovereignty over territory beyond its borders . It is the establishment of either settler colonies or administrative dependencies in which indigenous populations are directly ruled or displaced . Colonialism has been described as a form of colonialism .
 Colonizing nations generally dominate the resources, labor, and markets of the colonial territory . They may also impose socio-cultural, religious and linguistic structures on the conquered population .
 colonialism is often used interchangeably with imperialism . The word colonialism is sometimes used more broadly as it covers control exercised informally as well as formal military control or economic leverage .
 The term colonialism may also be used to refer to a set of beliefs used to legitimize or promote this system . It may also refer to the beliefs used in legitimizing or promoting colonialism .
 Colonialism was often based on the ethnocentric belief that the morals and values of the colonizer were superior to the colonized . Some observers link such beliefs to racism and pseudo-scientific theories dating to the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries .
 In the Western world, this led to a form of proto-social Darwinism that placed white people at the top of the animal kingdom . White people were 'naturally' in charge of dominating non-European indigenous populations .
 Negatively, attitudes of racial, cultural, religious and civilization superiority of the colonizers over the colonized continue to impact the lives of many people in the world today .
 The colonial 49 legacy is also one ot close linguistic and cultural links between people across the globe . On the other hand, the colonial legacy is one of the closest cultural links .
 Colonialism played a an inter-dependent world community, in which responsibility for the welfare of all and for the health of the planet is shared by everyone . Colonialism is a shared responsibility for all, and for health of all, everyone .
 Humanity may be evolving to a stage when exploitation of others and promotion of self-interest is yielding to a new understanding of what it means to be human . Humanity may have evolved into a stage where exploitation is no longer exploitative .
 Several types of colonies may be distinguished, reflecting different colonial objectives . Different colonial objectives may be different from those of the colonies .
 Settler colonies, such as Hungary and Thailand and the later U.S. of America, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Argentina were established by the movement of large numbers of citizens from a mother country or metropole .
 The local people or tribes, such as Aboriginal people in Canada and the U.S. were usually far overwhelmed numerically by the settlers . They were often moved forcibly to other regions or exterminated .
 These forcible population transfers, usually to areas of poorer-quality land or resources, often led to the permanent detriment of indigenous peoples . The transfer of indigenous people has led to a decline in indigenous communities .
 In today's language, such colonization would be called illegal immigration, and in most cases, crime and terrorism . In most instances, such colonization would be illegal immigration and terrorism, according to President Obama .
 The Vandals, Matabeles and Sioux were fleeing more powerful enemies, as part of a chain reaction of colonization . In some cases, for example, the colonizers were fleeing powerful enemies .
 Settler colonies may be contrasted with Dependencies, where the colonizers did not arrive as part 6f a mass emigration, but rather as administrators over existing sizable native populations . Settlers arrived as administrators rather than emigrants, rather than mass emigrants .
 Examples in this category include the British Raj, Egypt, the Dutch East Indies, and the Japanese colonial empire . Examples of colonial empires include the Dutch Empire, Egypt and Japan .
 In some cases large-scale colonial settlement was attempted in substantially pre-populated areas . The result was either ethnically mixed population or racially divided . With Plantation colonies, such as Barbados, Saint-Domingue and Jamaica, the white colonizers imported black slaves who rapidly
 Trading posts, such as Hong Kong, Macau, Malacca, Deshima and Singapore constitute a fifth category, where the primary purpose of the colony was to engage in trade rather than as a staging stage for further colonization of the hinterland .
 The historical phenomenon of colonization is one that stretches around the globe and across time . The term colonialism is normally used with reference to discontiguous European overseas empires rather than contiguous land-based empires .
 Examples of land-based empires include the Mongol Empire, a large empire stretching from the Pacific Ocean to Eastern Europe . Examples include the Empire of Alexander the Great, the Umayyad Caliphate, the Persian Empire, the Roman Empire .
 The Ottoman Empire was created across the Mediterranean Sea, North Africa and into South-Eastern Europe . It was created during the time of European colonization of the other parts of the world .
 Colonialism was led by Portuguese and Spanish exploration of the Americas, and the coasts of Africa, the Middle East, India, and East Asia . Colonialism led by the exploration of Africa and the coast of Africa .
 England, France and the Netherlands established their own overseas empires in the 17th century . They were in direct competition with each other and those of Spain and Portugal . Despite some earlier attempts, it was not until 17th Century that they successfully established overseas empires .
 The end of the eighteenth and early nineteenth century saw the first era of decolonization . Most of the European colonies in the Americas gained their independence from their respective metropoles .
 Spain and Portugal were irreversibly weakened after the loss of their New World colonies . Britain and France turned their attention to the Old World, particularly South Africa, India and South East Asia, where coastal enclaves had already been established .
 Germany, after being united under Prussia also sought colonies in Deutsch Ost Afrika . Germany also found colonies in Africa .
 The industrialization of the nineteenth century led to what has been termed the era of New Imperialism, when the pace of colonization rapidly accelerated . The height of the Scramble for Africa, the height of which was the height for Africa .
 The overseas colonies of the losers of World War I were distributed amongst the victors as mandates . The second phase of decolonization began in earnest at the end of WWII . It was not until World War II that the second phase began to decolonize .
 Imperial and colonial powers from ancient to modem times have often regarded their rule over others as an aspect of their own destiny, which is to civilize, educate and bring order to the world . Justification for Colonialism argued by Colonial Powers . Imperial powers often regarded rule over other people as
 The Roman Empire began as a result of defeating the Carthaginian Empire when it gained their extensive territories in North Africa . It soon developed the idea of extending Roman discipline and order and law to others as a reason for further imperial expansion .
 Napoleon Bonaparte saw his role as a unifier and as spreading a common code of law, although he also simply wanted to conquer the world . Napoleon saw the role as unifier but also as a conqueror and unifier .
 The British Empire began as an extension of their trading interests, fueled by the need for raw materials as well as for markets . The Empire began in the 1930s as a result of the need to find raw materials and markets .
 India is considered to be the jewel in the crown of the British Empire's imperial project . India was initially colonized by a commercial enterprise, the British East India Company .
 British conquests expanded into whole provinces of India as conquest, subterfuge, treaties with Indian princes and other means of expansion added teiritory . The whole Sub-continent was under British control until the end of the 1800s .
 It was, the poem said, a moral responsibility to rule over people who were ""half-devil and half child" who needed discipline, oversight and governance that only a superior race could provide . Poem said: "It was a moral duty to rule"
 Some saw the task of Christianizing and civilizing imperial sulgects as part of the same task . Some saw it as the work of civilizing and Christianizing imperial leaders .
 Religious motivation also lay behind the huge expanse of the Ottoman Empire . To extend Islamic governance to the rest of the world, the Empire was founded .
 Some in Britain saw it as their destiny to create a pax Brittanica as the Roman's had pax Romana . Some in the UK thought it was their destiny as they wanted to create an empire .
 Much of the so-called moral justification of colonialism was predicated on racist assumptions . Not only were some people better off being ruled by those who could bring order to their chaotic societies but they were genetically incapable of self-governance . Some people were better off having to be ruled by
 The argument developed that if the colonial power departed, ancient animosities and tribal rivalry would create a blood-bath; thus only colonial rule could keep the peace . Later, the argument became that if colonial power left, tribal rivalry and tribal tensions would create blood-bombs .
 Others would argue that divide and rule policy either exacerbated existing rivalries or encouraged and even manufactured division that did not exist before . Others argue that dividing and rule policies may have exacerbated rivalries .
 In post-colonial contexts, discussion of conflict is often reduced to the concept that this it is always driven by inter-tribal hostility . This is often the case of conflict, when this occurs, it is often driven by tribal hostility . In post colonial contexts, this is often
 As late as the end ot World W'ar I, the great powers divided the Ottoman space among themselves as League of Nations mandated territories, they argued that these populations required oversight until they developed the capacity to exercise the responsibilities of government .
 One of the pioneer critics of European colonialism was Bartolome de Las Casas . He was a pioneer critic of colonialism in Spain .
 He praised the qualities of the indigenous peoples of the America's and conuemned the greed and cruelty oi their Spanish conquerors . The author also praised the quality of the American peoples .
 Juan Gines de Sepulveda expressed the opposite view; the Spanish were in every respect superior to the natives, who lacked any trace of ""humanity"" Juan Ginella said the Spanish needed to be governed in the same way that children need to be parented .
 Justification for colonialism echoed this, arguing that some people were better off being ruled by others, or even living as their slaves . Justified for colonialism was argued that some of the world's most powerful people would be better off living as slaves .
 Colonial expansion was also often driven by competition with others . Blood was not always shed to see who.se empire would emerge as the most powerful m the world .
 Kipling's Kim is set in a battle between Britain and Russia in his novel . This was the ""great game,"" where Britain vies with Russia . Kipling: "This was the great game"
 The exception to this rule is the booming economies of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwa . The emerging Indian and Chinese powers are emerging in the region .
 The United States interfered in various countries, by issuing an embargo against Cuba after the 1959 Cuban Revolution . As did France before with its universalist doctrine, it claims that it acts for ""Humanity"" United States foreign intervention .
 The proponents of the idea of neo-colonialism cite the 1983 United States invasion of Grenada and the 1989 U.S. invasion of Panama, overthrowing Manuel Noriega .
 This interference, in particular in South and Central American countries, is reminiscent of the nineteenth century Monroe doctrine and the ""Big stick diplomacy"" codified by Theodore Roosevelt . This interference is similar to that of the late Monroe doctrine .
 Left-wing critics have spoken of an ""American Empire,"" pushed in particular by the military-industrial complex . Dwight D Eisenhower warned against in 1961 against the military industrial complex .
 Some Republicans have supported, without much success since World War I, isolationism . On the other hand, some Republicans support isolationism. Some Republicans do not support isolationistism .
 The New International Economic Order was a set of proposals put forward during the 1970s by some developing countries through the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development . It was intended to promote their interests by improving their terms of trade and increasing development assistance .
 It was meant to be a revision of the international economic system in favour of Third World countries, replacing the Bretton Woods system, which had benefited the leading states that had created it-especially the United States .
 A Programme of Action and a Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States were also adopted . Along with the declaration, a programme of Action was adopted .
 In the 1970s and 1980s, developing countries pushed for NIEO and an accompanying set of documents to be adopted by the UN General Assembly . Developed countries pushed to NIEO to adopt NIEO but it was never adopted .
 Subsequently, however, these norms became only of rhetorical and political value, except for some partly viable mechanisms, such as the Restrictive Business Practice Code adopted in 1980 and the Common Fund for Commodities which came in force in 1989 .
 Developing countries must be entitled to regulate and control the activities of multinational corporations operating within their territory . Developing nations must be able to control and control multinational corporations .
 They must be free to nationalize or expropriate foreign property on conditions favourable to them . They must also be free from expropriation or nationalization of foreign property .
 They must be free to set up associations of primary commodities producers similar to the OPEC . All other States must recognize this right and refrain from taking economic, military, or political measures to restrict it .
 International trade should be based on the need to ensure stable, equitable, and remunerative prices for raw materials, as well as transfer of technology to developing countries, says David Cameron .
 Social mechanisms are possible to effect resource allocation in any economic order . A number of social mechanisms could be used to allocate resources, such as social networks .
 An authoritative allocation mechanism involves direct control of resources . At the other end of the spectrum, more market-oriented private allocation methods are possible . International Relations mechanisms are possible.
 Most of the debates within the NIEO occurred over allocation mechanisms, with southern hemisphere countries favoring authoritative solutions .
 NIEO is based on the mercantilist idea that international trade would be a zerosum game . International trade benefits the rich at the expense of the poor, says NIEO .
 Some American economists challenge the idea of trade as a zero-sum game . Some economists say trade is not worth worth as much as it should be .
 NIEO also proposes central planning, as opposed to free markets . NIEO: Central planning vs. free markets is a form of government policy .
 This demand was expressed comprehensively in the New International Economic Order and the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States promoted by UNCTAD in the 1970s . This demand is expressed in the new international Economic Order .
 Although the Charter was never accepted by developing countries and is now dead, the political, economic, and social concerns that inspired it are still present . The Charter was not accepted by . developing countries .
 The Charter called for restitution for the economic and social costs of colonialism, racial discrimination, and foreign domination . The Charter was created in 1903, and the Charter was published in 1903 .
 It would have imposed a duty on all states to adjust the prices of exports to their imports . The move would have been imposed by the UK government . The UK is the most populous country in the world .
 The realization of the New International Economic Order was an impetus for developing country support fcr the Tokyo Round of trade negotiations . Developed countries support the Tokyo round of trade talks .
 Critics of the WTO continue to state that little of substance for developing countries came out of either the Tokyo or Uruguay Rounds . Critics say the rounds failed to provide enough support for developing nations .
 Professor Harry Johnson: Most efficient way to help the poor is to transfer resources from those most able to pay to those most in need . The powerful countries of North America and Western Europe felt threatened by the NIEO and tried to criticize and minimize it .
 NIEO proposes that poor countries that have monopoly power should be able to extort these transfers . Instead of this, NIEO suggests that those poor countries should extort the transfers . NIEO: Those poor countries who have monopoly powers should have the power to extract these transfers from them .
 Commanding prices above their natural level usually reduces consumption and thus causes unemployment among producers . Commanding price increases usually reduce consumption, thus causing unemployment among the producers .
 Price regulation typically gives the extra income to those in control of who is allowed to produce, e.g., to governments or land-owners .
 The foreign policy of the United States is conducted by the President and the Secretary of State . The U.S. foreign policy is officially conducted by President and Secretary of state .
 Less formal foreign policy is conducted through exchanges between citizens and other government officials, through commerce and trade, or through third party states or organizations .
 United States Foreign Policy is marked by the country's large economy, well-funded military, and notable political influence . U.S. Foreign Policy marks by its large economy and well-armed military .
 According to CIA World Factok, the United States has the world's largest economy, the world’s most well-funded military, and a large amount of political influence . According to the CIA, the U.S. has the largest economy in the world .
 The officially stated goals of the foreign policy of the U.S. are; 1. The goal of the United States . The goal is to achieve the objectives of foreign policy, such as; 2. The goals are to achieve; the goal is; the goals are; the objectives
 " Protecting the safety and freedom of all American citizens, both within the United States and abroad; “ 2. Protecting . the safety of all Americans, both . within the . U.S. and abroad . “ Protecting and protecting all Americans’ safety and
 3. Protecting allied nations of the United States from attack or invasion and creating mutually beneficial international defense arrangements and partnerships to ensure this; . 3 . Protecting allies of the U.S. from attack and invasion; . Creating mutually beneficial alliances and partnerships with other nations; . Protect
 4. Promotion of peace, freedom, and democracy in all regions of the world . 4. Promoting peace and freedom in all . regions of . the world; 4. promoting peace, . freedom and democracy .
 Furthering free trade, unencumbered by tariffs, interdictions and other economic barriers, and furthering capitalism . Furthering capitalism in order to foster economic growth, improve living conditions everywhere, and promote the sale and mobility of United States products to international consumers .
 Bringing developmental and humanitarian aid to foreign peoples in need . Bringing development and humanitarian assistance to foreign people .
 The United States has frequently been criticized for not living up to its noble goals . National self-interest, unilateral decisions, and projection of power frequently contradict stated goals .
 Many people throughout the world admire the principles for which it stands, but they do not trust the actual policies of the United States . Thus, while many people in the U.S. admire its principles, they do r 'l trust its policies, not its principles .
 This problem is derived from the lack of ar.y checks and balances on the use of power in foreign affairs by the . presiaent . This is a lack of . checks and . balances . on the . use of the power in . foreign affairs . by the pres. government
 When the U.S. was a young and relatively powerless nation, this was not an issue . This was not the issue when the United States was young, relatively powerless .
 The use of power unilaterally has become a problem for the U.S. as it has grown, the founders worried . However, as its power in the world has grown the use of that power unilaterally is a problem .
 Decision-making The President negotiates treaties with foreign nations . The President is responsible for the nation's foreign policy .
 The President is also Commander in Chief of the military, and as such has broad authority over the armed forces once they are deployed . As such, he is the President of the United States .
 The Secretary of State is the foreign minister of the United States . He is the primary conductor of state-to-state diplomacy . The secretary of state is responsible for diplomacy .
 The Congress has the power to declare war, but the President has the ability to commit military troops to an area for 60 days without Congressional approval . The President can commit troops to a military area without approval from Congress .
 The Senate also holds the exclusive right to approve treaties made by the President . It also has the exclusive power to approve the President's treaties .
 Congress is responsible for passing bills that determine the general character and policies of U.S. foreign policy . Congress also has responsibility for passing legislation that determine foreign policy decisions . Congress is also responsible for setting the policies of the United States .
 The third arm of government is the Supreme Court, which has traditionally played a minimal role in foreign policy . The Supreme Court traditionally plays a small role in the foreign policy of the United States .
 The Constitution provided for foreign policy to be conducted by the executive branch . After that, the president's executive branch conducted foreign policy . President Barack Obama was elected to the presidency .
 The U.S. established the Monroe Doctrine, a policy of keeping European powers out of the Americas . After the Spanish colonies in Latin America declared independence, the United States established the policy . The Monroe Doctrine was established after the Spanish colony declared independence .
 United States expansionism led to war with Mexico and to diplomatic conflict with Britain over the Oregon Tenltory and with Spain over Florida and later Cuba . U.S. expansionism also led to conflict with Spain and Britain over Florida .
 During the American Civil War, the U.S. accused Britain and France of supporting the Confederate States and trying to control Mexico . After that, the United States was unchallenged in its home territory, except by Native Americans .
 The United States did not pursue the idea of becoming a world power until the i890s . ViTiile, the United States strove to be the dominant influence in the Americas .
 Federal government initially supported almost entirely tlirough tariffs on foreign goods . Federal government was initially supported by almost entirely . The federal government is now a world power .
 Tariffs had the effect of protecting fledgling U.S. industries by giving them a competitive advantage in the United States . As industrial and economic power grew in the second half of the nineteenth century, companies began to expand their markets to other countries .
 It was thought that a navy not unlike Britain's was required to protect the shipment of U.S. goods overseas .
 The United States used its naval power to secure ports around the world . The U.S. Navy used it to secure the world's most important ports .
 It occupied territories in the Pacific, such as Hawaii and the Philippines . It demanded the opening of Japan to trade, and competed with other powers for influence in China .
 The United States, and President Theodore Roosevelt, were strong supporters of the Hague Peace Palace and the International Court in 1899 .
 Roosevelt was given a Nobel Prize in 1905 for helping to negotiate a dispute between Japan and Russia . Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel Prize for his role in negotiations between Russia and Japan .
 The United States was unwilling to submit to the jurisdiction of the Court when a case was brought against the United States annexation of Hawaii was brought . However, the U.S. refused to submit .
 The U.S. joined the Allies in World War I in part to protect huge economic loans by United States Banks to England and France . As a growing military and economic power, the United States joined the Allied effort to protect economic loans .
 iMnericans felt they had been duped by Washington after a huge number of causalities were incurred . The U.S. returned to more isolationist policies through the 1920s and 1930s .
 It was a major player in the establishment of the United Nations . It was one of five permanent members of the Security Council .
 The Marshall Plan was a foreign policy strategy of nation building for defeated nations which had results unparalleled in history . Marshall Plan had results unprecedented in history.
 United States citizens took a leading role in the creation of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights under the chairmanship of Eleanor Roosevelt . However, the United States Senate never ratified any United Nations covenants which could be viewed as compromising U.S. sovereignty .
 Eisenhower warned of a growing military-industrial complex that exerted influence on U.S. foreign policy in 1952 . Eisenhower said in 1952 that the military industrial complex was influential in foreign policy .
 During the Cold War, U.S. foreign policy sought to limit the influence of the Soviet Union around the world . The Korean War and Vietnam War led to the Vietnam War . The Cold War ended with the collapse of the West .
 Alliances sought with any regime that opposed the Soviet Union, regardless of whether it was democratic or maintained respect for human rights . Alliances were sought with all regimes opposed to the Soviet Soviet Union .
 The United States also sought to overthrow regim.es friendly to the Soviet Union, regardless of whether they were democratically elected . The U.S. also sought the overthrow of those who supported the regime .
 In the West, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization was established with the United States in a leadership role . The Eastern bloc responded with a collective security arrangement knov/n as the Warsaw Pact .
 The United States' foreign policy was heavily influenced by the doctrines of ""national self-interest,"" ""power politics,"" and ""strategic thinking" of the Soviet Union . The U.S. policy of post-World War II led to a foreign policy of the United States
 U.S. citizens, churches, and other NGOs engaged in efforts to help the poor and disenfranchised throughout the world . The Peace Corps was initiated by President John F Kennedy and United States Aid for International Development .
 The U.S. provided covert support to the Taliban in Afghanistan to drive out the Soviet Union . It also supported the Contras in Nicaragua to topple the government of Daniel Ortega which was friendly with Russia .
 In the twilight of the Cold War, the United States invaded Panama, officially because Noriega was involved in drug trafficking, but in reality because the U.S. did not want to relinquish the Panama canal on Panama's terms . The United States also invaded Panama in the late
 The United States had military and economic interests in every region of the globe . By the time of the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1989, the U.S. had interests in most of the world .
 In 1991, the United States emerged as the world's sole superpower . The U.S. emerged as a superpower in 1991 .
 The U.S. organized and led the Gulf War against Iraq in response to its invasion of Kuwait . It led the war against the Iraqi government in the 1990s .
 After the September 11, 2001 attack, the country declared the ""War on Terror,"" under which it has led invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq . After the 9/11 attacks, the U.S. declared the war on terror .
 The invasion of Afghanistan to capture the perpetrators of 9/11 was considered legitimate by most of the world . The invasion was seen as legitimate by the world as it captured the perpetrators in Afghanistan .
 The unilateral decision of George W Bush to preemptively invade Iraq without proof of weapons of mass destruction was generally viewed as a move toward an empire of world domination rather than a republic among a community of nations .
 The war also eventually became widely discredited in the U.S. as evidenced by the defeat of Republicans who supported the Bush war strategy in the congressional elections of 2006 .
 The United States has one of the largest diplomatic forces of any nation . The U.S. has a large number of diplomatic forces .
 Only a few nations do not have formal diplomatic relations with the U.S. The United States is one of the world's largest countries .
 In practical terms, this lack of formal relations do not impede the U.S.'s communication with these nations . This lack of diplomatic relations does not impede communication with them, however, .
 U.S. relations are usually conducted via the United Kingdom, Canada, Switzerland, or another friendly third-party .
 In the case of the Republic of China, de facto relations are conducted through the American Institute in Taiwan . De facto relations between Taiwan and China are conducted by American Institute .
 The United States maintains a Normal Trade Relations list and several countries are excluded from it . Excluded countries are subject to significantly higher tariffs on their exports to the United States .
 The United States did not enter into peace-time alliances until 1949, when it became a founding member of NATO . NATO is the world's largest military alliance .
 The United States is compelled to defend any NATO state that is attacked by a foreign power . Under the NATO charter, the U.S. is obliged to defend all NATO states that are attacked by an enemy .
 The U.S. was not compelled to participate in the Falklands War between Argentina and the United Kingdom . This is restricted to within the North American and European areas, for this reason .
 New nations must meet standards of civil and economic liberty and be invited to join by existing members of the U.S. The U.N. will not be allowed to join any new nations .
 NATO is a voluntary alliance of free nations . It has been considered by some to be a better foundation for future global organization than the United Nations . The U.S. is considered to be easier for the United States to serve a world leadership role .
 The United States has also given major non-NATO ally-status to fourteen nations . The U.S. also has given major ally status to fourteen other nations .
 Each state has a unique relationship with the United States, involving various militarj' and economic partnerships and alliances . The United States is one of the world's most powerful states .
 The countr\'*’s closest ally is the United Kingdom, itself a major military and economic power .
 Other allies include South Korea, Israel, Canada, Australia, Australia and Japan .
 The Republic of China does not have official diplomatic relations recognized and is no longer officially recognized by the State Department of the United States . It is considered by some an ally of the U.S. by some .
 U.S. President George Bush and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh signed a landmark agreement on civilian nuclear energy cooperation in 2005 . In 2005, President Bush and Prime Minister Singh signed the agreement .
 The deal is significant because India is not a member of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty . India detonated a nuclear device in 1974 . The country is not part of the N.N.A. Treaty .
 The deal greatly increases strategic and economic cooperation between the wor’d's two largest democracies . The deal will greatly increase economic and political ties between the two nations .
 U.S. foreign policy has been increasingly criticized by both foreign and domestic media . The United States has been criticized for its foreign policy in recent years . The U.K. government has been accused of being too critical of foreign policy .
 The rhetoric of peace, while a record of a long list of U.S. military interventions in practice, is not always followed by peace .
 The rhetoric of freedom and democracy, while supporting many former and current dictatorships, has been used to back dictatorships . The rhetoric and democracy is the same as the rhetoric of support for dictatorships.
 The rhetoric of free trade abroad abroad, while continuing to impose import tariffs to protect local industries, like wood, steel and agricultural products, from global competition, continues to .
 The rhetoric of environmental concern, while refusing to sign environmental treaties like the Kyoto Protocol, is a problem for the U.S.
 The rhetoric of defending of human rights, while refusing to sign many international human rights treaties, or acceptance of the World Court of Justice, is hypocritical . The rhetoric is that of defending human rights while not signing many international agreements .
 The failure to act according to just war principles with the preemptive invasion of Iraq is a failure . It is the failure of the U.S. to act in the way it did in the pre-war era .
 Some argue that the U.S. is obligated to use its power to create a more peaceful world . Others say that the United States should use the power to help create a better world .
 Some argue that the increased American military involvement around the world is an outgrowth of the inherent instability of the world state system as it existed in the late nineteenth Century . The increased U.S. involvement in the world may be a result of the instability of international relations .
 The United States has assumed a prominent peacekeeping role, due to the easily demonstrable inter-state insecurity that existed before 1945 . The inherent failings of this system of Great Powers led to the outbreak of World War I and World War II .
 Some experts have stated that since the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq was not a war to defend against an imminent threat, it was a war of aggression . Therefore under the Nuremberg Principles it constitutes the supreme international crime from which all other war crimes follow .
 Benjamin Ferencz, a chief prosecutor of Nazi war crimes at Nuremberg, said George W Bush should be tried for war crimes along with Saddam Hussein for starting 'aggressive' wars . Ferecz said Saddam Hussein should have been tried for his 1990 attack on Kuwait and
 The Array's field manual required such authorization for an offensive war, professor says . There was no authorization from the United Nations Security Council, professor Boyle says .
 Other realist critics, such as the late George F Kennan, have noted that the responsibility of the U.S. is only to protect the rights of its own citizens .
 Woodrow Wilson's diplomatic philosophy was one of the major tenets of his diplomatic philosophy, realists say . Wilson's emphasis on democratization or nation-building abroad was a major part of Wilson's policy .
 The failure of the League of Nations to enforce the will of the international community in the cases of Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan in the 1930s demonstrated the folly of Wilson's idealism . Realists say the inherent weakness of the new states created at the Paris Peace
 There is also criticism of alleged human rights abuse at U.S. detention camps in Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib prisons .
 Government responses include that Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo Bay, and the network of secret CIA jails in Eastern Europe and the Middle East were largely isolated incidents and not reflective of general U.S. conduct . Government responses to these criticisms include that coerced interrogation in Guantanamo and Europe is necessary to
 As far as measured by goods and monetary amounts the U.S. is the most generous country in the world .
 The average United States citizen donates relatively more of his or her private, personal time and income to charity than any other nation's citizens . The average U.S. citizen gives relatively more time and money to charity to charity .
 Religious tithes, emergency donations to relief organizations, and donations to medical research, are common and frequent . Emergency donations are also common .
 The United States tax code structure is designed to provide incentives to private individuals and corporations for charitable donations . The U.S. tax code provides incentives for private individuals to donate to charity .
 The United States is involved in several territorial disputes with Canada . The U.S. is involved with maritime disputes over the Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea and Strait of Juan de Fuca .
 These disputes have become dormant recently, and are largely considered not to affect the strong relations between the two nations . The disputes have been dormant recently .
 The United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba . Only mutual agreement or United States abandonment of the area can terminate the lease . The base is located in Guantanamo Bay .
 Cuba contends that the lease is invalid as the Platt Amendment creating the lease was included in the Cuban Constitution under threat of force and thus is voided by article 52 of the 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties . Cuba says that the agreement is invalid .
 United States has made no territorial claim in Antarctica . United States does not recognize the claims of any other nation . U.S. has no territorial claims of Antarctica .
 U.S. foreign policy is influenced by efforts to halt imports of illicit drugs, including cocaine, heroin, and marijuana . Illicit drugs are included in the United States' foreign policy .
 Latin America is a focus for the U.S. War on Drags . This is especially true in Latin America, especially .
 The United States and China completed an agreement which prohibited the shipment of opium between the two countries in 1880 . Those efforts date back to at least 1880, when the U.S. and China agreed to ban opium shipments .
 The Foreign Relations Authorization Act requires the President to identify the major drug transit or major illicit drug-producing countries . Over a century later, the Foreign Relations Act requires that the President identify major drug-traffickers .
 Bahamas, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, India, Jamaica, Laos, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru and Venezuela .
 Burma and Venezuela are countries that the U.S. considers to have failed to adhere to their obligations under international countemarcotics agreements during the previous twelve months . Burma, Venezuela and Burma are two of the countries the United States considers failing to comply with their obligations . The U.
 Afghanistan, the People's Republic of China and Vietnam were absent from the 2005 list . Canada was also omitted in spite of evidence that criminal groups there are increasingly involved in the production of MDMA destined for the U.S.
 The United States believes that The Netherlands are successfully countering the production and flow of MDMA to the United States . In the history of the U.S. presidents have often used democracy as a justification for military intervention abroad .
 A number of studies have been devoted to the historical success rate of the United States in exporting democracy abroad . The U.S. has a history of exporting democracy overseas .
 Most studies of American intervention have been pessimistic about the history of the U.S. exporting democracy . Most studies are pessimistic about American intervention in Iraq .
 Some studies find U.S. intervention has had mixed results . Another by Hermann and Kegley have found that military interventions have increased democracy .
 U.S. first attempted to export democracy was in Latin America through intervention from 1912 to 1932 . Intervention did not export democracy, Professor Paul W Drake says . Intervention from 1912- 1932 was the first attempt at exporting democracy .
 Democracy failed because democracy needs to develop out of internal conditions, author says . U.S. leaders usually defined democracy as elections only . Democracy failed, he says, because democracy must develop from within .
 The United States Department of State disapproved of rebellion of any kind . U.S. disapproved . of rebellion v/hich were often mconectly labeled ""revolutions,"" even against dictatorships .
 The U.S. has intervened in 35 countries, and only one did a ""lull fledged, stable democracy"" develop within 10 years in Colombia . Only one case, Colombia, did the country develop a stable democracy within a decade .
 Factors included limits on executive power, clear rules for the transition of power, universal adult suffrage, and competitive elections . Factors were also included in presidential elections .
 Most countries where the U.S. intervenes never become a democracy or become even more authoritarian after 10 years . Most countries never become democracies or become more authoritarian . The United States intervenes in most countries where it intervenes .
 The success of democracy in former Axis countries may be due to their per-capita income . Success of democracy is due to these countries' per-capsita income, says Julian Zelizer .
 No democratic country with a per capita income above $6,000 has ever become an autocracy . Steven Krasner of the CDDRL states that a high per capita capita may help build a democracy .
 Hermann and Kegley find that U.S. interventions which protect or promote democracy increase freedom in those countries . United States intervention has exported democnfcy, they say .
 Penceny concludes it is difficult to know from the Hermann and Kegley study whether U.S. intervention has only produced less repressive autocratic governments .
 Penceny states that the U.S. has attempted to export democracy in 33 of its 93 twentieth-century military interventions . The United States has also attempted to do so in the past three decades .
 Penceny argues that pro-liberal policies after military intervention have a positive impact on democracy . He says pro-liberation policies after a military intervention are beneficial to democracy .
 In 69 instances the country became less democratic after the intervention . In 69 times the country was less democratic following the intervention, according to reports .
 Democracy requires people capable of self-direction and accepting of pluralism . Democracy requires self-directed people to be able to accept pluralism, says Julian Zelizer .
 Too often it is thought that elections, a free press, and other democratic political machinery will be sufficient for democratization, says Julian Zelizer . Zelizer: Too often we think elections, free press and political machinery are sufficient .
 The United States Constitution stipulates that U.S. Foreign Policy is conducted by the executive branch of the government . There is no political-structural method in place to ensure that foreign policy actions reflect American ideals .
 George Washington set U.S. foreign policy in motion as a gentleman acting according to aristocratic codes of his day . George Washington was an aristocratic gentleman who acted in accordance with aristocratic code .
 As U.S. businesses grew, they advocated a navy that could help make a world safe for commerce . However, as United States businesses grow, they argued that a navy could help .
 As the Soviet Union became a global power after World War n, partnerships with enemies of communism were sought . The Soviet Union sought partnerships with opponents of communism .
 U.S. often worked with nondemocratic regimes that would protect its strategic and economic interests as client states . "The United States was often easier, in the short term, by working with nondenocratic regimes," she says .
 Other nations experience frequent U.S. foreign policy shifts every few years when new presidents are elected with different foreign policy priorities .
 This makes it difficult for anyone to believe that the U.S. will use its power reliably, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Many people subscribe to U.S. foreign policy ideals and would like to see them become reality, not just rhetoric . Yet, many people still want to see the ideals of foreign policy become reality and not rhetoric .
 Developing consistency in foreign policy will help legitimize U.S. foreign policy in the eyes of the world . Developing leadership without double standards in international affairs will be necessary, says Julian Zelizer .
 Q.12 Write a comprehensive note on North Korea and weapons of mass destruction . Q.11: Write a detailed account of North Korea's nuclear program .
 North Korea claims to possess nuclear weapons . CIA says it has a substantial arsenal of chemical weapons . North Korea also claims to have nuclear weapons, CIA says .
 The U.S. Geological Survey and Japanese seismological authorities detected an earthquake with a preliminary estimated magnitude of 4.4 on the Richter scale in North Korea . The quake corroborates some aspects of the North Korean claims .
 The world community left the MAD world of nuclear weapons at the end of the Cold War, only to enter the Terror world with rogue nations and terrorists groups eager to possess nuclear weapons .
 North Korea stands at the forefront of rogue nations seeking nuclear weapons and delivery systems along with Iran . North Korea is one of the most secretive countries in the world seeking nukes .
 The world community has been taking a unified stance, demanding a dismantling of nuclear programs in both nations . The world has been demanding the dismantling of both nations' nuclear programs .
 Six party talks have been conducted, including Russia, China, Japan, South Korea, North Korea, and the United States, with a measure of success to date . North Korea is one of the world's most isolated countries .
 North Korea weakened by famine, drought, a lack of resources, and foreign reserves, still has the capacity to build and use nuclear weapons . North Korea has been weakened by drought, famine, and lack of foreign reserves .
 Korea has been a divided country since 1945, after Korea's liberation from Japan at the end of World War El. El. Kim Jong-won: The Korean peninsula has been divided since 1945 .
 The Korean War began with North Korea's invasion of South Korea on June 25, 1950, and continues under truce to this day . North Korea invaded South Korea in 1950 and the Korean War is now under truce .
 The United States rejected North Korea's call for bilateral talks concerning a non-aggression pact . The U.S. called for talks that include the People's Republic of China, Russia, Japan, and South Korea .
 The United States pointed out North Korea's violation of prior bilateral agreements while North Korea has insisted on them, leading to a diplomatic stalemate . The U.S. pointed out the North Korea violation of previous bilateral agreements .
 Plutonium Concern focuses around two reactors at the Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center . Pyongyang accused South Korea of conspiring with the United States to attack the isolated and impoverished state .
 The smaller reached completion in 1986, and has since produced possibly 8,000 spent fuel elements . The smaller was completed in 1986 and has produced possibly eight,000 elements since .
 Construction of the larger plant commenced in 1984, but as of 2003 still stood incomplete . The larger plant still stood unfinished .
 North Koreans constructed the plant based on the declassified blueprints of the Calder Hall power reactors used to produce plutonium for the UK nuclear weapons program . North Korea constructed the larger plant based .
 The smaller plant produces enough material to build one new bomb per year . The plant is located in California, California, near Los Angeles, California .
 Small amounts of plutonium could have been produced in a Russiansupplied IRT-2000 heavy water-moderated research reactor completed in 1967 . safeguards violations at the plant have never been reported .
 By 1994, the U.S. believed that Nortfi Korea had enough reprocessed plutonium to produce about ten bombs . The amount of plutonium was believed to be increasing with the amount increasing .
 Faced with diplomatic pressure and the threat of U.S. military air strikes against the reactor, the reactor was shut down . The reactor was built in 2009 after a series of high-profile nuclear tests were ordered by Russia .
 North Korea agreed to dismantle its plutonium program as part of the Agreed Framework . South Korea and the United States would provide North Korea with light water reactors and fuel oil until those reactors could be completed .
 The light water reactors would require imported enriched uranium, the U.S. could easily track the amount of reactor fuel and waste . It would increase North Korea's difficulty of diverting nuclear waste for plutonium reprocessing . North Korea could also be hard to divert nuclear waste to plutonium repro
 The Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization had failed to build the promised light water reactors . With bureaucratic red tape and political obstacles from North Korea, the agency has been unable to build them .
 North Korea charged that the U.S. failed to uphold their end of the agreement by pro-aid energy aid . North Korea returned to using its old reactors in late 2002 .
 U.S. officials charged North Korea with beginning an enriched uranium program . North Korea has been accused of starting a nuclear program . U.N. officials say North Korea's nuclear program began in 2009 .
 Pakistan supplied key technology and information to North Korea in exchange for missile technology around 1997, U.S. officials say . Pakistan, through Abdul Qadeer Khan, supplied key information and technology to N. Korea . North Korea is believed to have made a deal with Pakistan .
 Pakistani President Pervez Musharaf acknowledged in 2005, that Khan had provided centrifuges and their designs to North Korea . North Korea was the first country to admit to providing the centrifugees .
 The media publicized that program in October 2002, when North Korea admitted to the U.S restarting its uranium enrichment program . North Korean officials admitted to restarting the program .
 The agreement also committed North Korea to implement the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula . It commits both Koreas to abandon enrichment or reprocessing facilities .
 The United States called North Korea on the violation of its commitment to abandon enrichment facilities . The U.S. calls North Korea's commitment to abandoning enrichment facilities a breach of its pledge to abandon such facilities .
 In December 2002, the KEDO Board followed through on threats to suspend fuel oil shipments in response to North Korea's violation, leading North Korea to the end of the Agreed Framework . North Korea announced plans to reactivate a dormant nuclear fuel processing program and power plant .
 North Korea expelled United Nations inspectors and withdrew from the Non-Proliferation Treaty . North Korea soon thereafter expelled U.N. inspectors and withdrawn from the treaty .
 CIA reports of North Korea developing uranium enrichment technology had been overstated or misread the intelligence . In 2007, reports from Washington suggested that the 2002 CIA reports had been misread or overstated .
 U.S. officials ceased making that a major issue in the six-party talks . United States officials stopped making that major issue a top priority .
 President George W Bush's strategy with North Korea and Iran differed from that against Saddam's Iraq . North Korea was named as a member of the ""Axis of Evil" following the September 11, 2001 attacks following 9/11 .
 U.S. officials sought diplomatic pressure with China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, China, Russia to persuade North Korea to abandon it's nuclear ambitions . North Korea has been seen as a threat to the North Korea .
 The United States ruled out immediate military action out . Although not ruling out military action as a resort, the U.S. has ruled out any immediate action . The U.N. did not rule out any military action .
 North Korea maintains 66 International Relations one of the largest standing armies in the world . North Korea positioned to inflict enormous initial damage on the South, made the military option one of extreme last resort .
 The last resort would come with North Korea close to producing nuclear weapons . North Korea has a long history of nuclear testing .
 North Korea possession of nuclear weapons, as with Iran, would upset the balance of power . North Korea's nuclear weapons could upset the power balance in North Korea .
 During the standoff between the USSR and the United States during the Cold War, a rational approach prevailed in the MAD . world .
 With North Korea and bran, international policy thinkers doubt either nation would stop at the thought of total annihilation . North Korea is the world's most powerful state of power .
 The primary problem is that the current U.S. administration doesn't want an agreement with North Korea . John Feffer, co-director of the think tank Foreign Policy in Focus, says the current United States administration fundamentally doesn’t want a North Korea agreement .
 The Bush administration considers the 1994 Agreed framework to have been a flawed agreement . Bush administration considered the 1994 agreement to be flawed .
 It doesn't want to be saddled with a similar agreement, for if it did sign one, it would then be open to charges of ""appeasing" Pyongyang . North Korea doesn’t want to sign one .
 North Korea further inflamed U.S. ire with evidence of state-sponsored drug smuggling, money laundering, and wide scale counterfeiting . North Korea has been accused of drug smuggling and money laundering .
 Diplomatic efforts at resolving the North Korean situation complicated by the differing goals and interests of the nations of the region . North Korea is a major source of tension .
 Japan and South Korea express concern about North Korean counter-strikes following possible military action against North Korea . While none of the parties desire a North Korea with nuclear weapons, Japan and S. Korea, especially .
 The People's Republic of China and South Korea worry about the economic and social consequences if this situation causes the North Korean government to collapse . South Korea and China are concerned about the consequences of the situation .
 Zurich-based company ABB won a contract to provide the design and key components for two light-water nuclear reactors to North Korea in 2000 .
 Some scholars argue North Korea has been using nuclear weapons primarily as a political tool . Analysts say it is to bring the United States to the table to begin reestablishing normal relations with North Korea .
 The threat of nuclear weapons has been the only North Korean policy that has brought the U.S. into negotiations on their tenns. That argument contends that the threat of nukes is the only policy to bring the United States into negotiations .
 Bruce Cummings: Activity around Yongbyon facility may have been done to draw the attention of U.S. satellites . Cummings says activity may be based on information gathered by the CIA .
 CIA had not claimed North Korea had nuclear weapons, but that they had enough material to create such weapons if they choose to do so . CIA said North Korea has enough material for such weapons to create .
 North Korea’s energy supply has been deteriorating since the 1990s, when Russian and China abandoned their communist commitment . North Korea has been unable to rely on Russia and China for energy since 1990s .
 North Korea, once a darling of the Soviet and Chinese communist powers, became an embarrassment . North Korea was once an embarrassment to the Soviet, Chinese and Soviet powers .
 As Russia and China turned toward a free enterprise approach toward domestic and international economy, they sought to ween North Korea from their dependence upon their aid, especially Russian oil . North Korea is now dependent on Russia's oil .
 North Korea is in an energy crisis . It has a lack of foreign reserves to purchase oil on the open market . That has left North Korea in a power crisis .
 North Korea possesses an insignificant indigenous nuclear power capacity . The two light-water moderated plants, if built, would be an important source of electricity in a nation with scarce resources .
 Donald Rumsfeld demonstrated the severe Jack of electricity for the entire nation in a photograph released in October 2006 . The photograph was released by the former Secretary of State of State in 2006 .
 Many parties have a vested interest in the claim that North Korea has nuclear weapons . North Korea is believed to have had nuclear weapons in the past .
 Kim Jong-il inherited an economy devastated by the collapse of world communism . The North Korean communist dictator inherited the country's economic collapse .
 Kim fears that the fate of Romanian dictator, Nicolae Ceausescu, awaits him . Kim fears he could be killed by the former dictator . Kim says he has no idea what the fate awaits him in Romania .
 Kim might find himself on trial for his life if the North Korean communist government suddenly collapses . Kim may find himself facing trial for life if his government collapses .
 The nuclear card, along with the near total control he has of North Korean society through the police and army, has served as both a protection of his power and a source of sorely needed revenue and natural resources .
 Leading politicians in Japan have called for discussion on removing Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution prohibiting a standing army beyond national security forces in light of North Korea's provocative missile tests in the Sea of Japan and noncompliance with ending nuclear weapons development .
 The United States has followed a bipartisan foreign policy war on terror, committed to take the v/ar with terrorist groups and nations to the source rather than wait for terrorist attacks on home soil, since the 9/11 attacks .
 Neither the Democrat's nor the Republicans seek abandoning that foreign policy principle . The Iraq War has been hotly debated in the United States, but neither the Democrats nor Republicans want abandoning that principle .
 The United States recently reduced its forces in South Koiea from 40,000 to 30,000 troops . The U.S. has pledged to turn over full defense of South Korea to the South Korean military .
 The reality of taking the lead in their own defense has sobered South Korean politicians of all parities to take the North Korean treat seriously, prompting criticism of the Sunshine Policy .
 The concession followed a series of sixparty talks, involving North Korea, South Korea, China, Russia, Japan, and the United States, began in 2003 . North Korea's concession follows series of talks involving six countries, including North Korea .
 North Korea will submit a list of its nuclear programs, disabling their nuclear facility in exchange for fuel aid and normalization talks with the U.S. and Japan . North Korea's nuclear facility will be disabled in exchange with fuel aid .
 IAEA inspectors confirmed the shutdown of North Korea's Yongbyon nuclear reactor . That was delayed in April when North Korean money laundering came to light in Banco Delta Asia .
 North Korea acceded to the Biological Weapons Convention in 1987, and the Geneva Protocol on January 4, 1989, but refused to sign the Chemical Weapons Convention . North Korea has not signed the chemical weapons Convention .
 Intelligence reports suggest that North Korea possesses a substantial arsenal of chemical weapons . North Korea reportedly acquired the technology to produce tabun and mustard gas as early as the 1950s, and now possesses a full arsenal of nerve agents .
 North Korea has spent considerable resources on equipping its army with chemical-protection equipment . The North Korean government has spent much of its resources on chemical protection equipment .
 As of 2005, North Korea's No Dong missiles travel 1,300 km, able to reach South Korea, Japan, and parts of Russia and China . The missile's capacity to carry nuclear weapons has been questioned . North Korea has no nuclear weapons, but the missile is capable of carrying
 BlvI-25 is a North Korean designed long-range ballistic missile with range capabilities of up to 1,550 miles . It has the potential of carrying a nuclear warhead . The missile could be used to carry a nuclear weapon .
 North Korea has been developing the Taepodong-1 missile with a range of 2,000 km. North Korea is developing a missile that could be used to launch a nuclear missile . North Korea says it has been working on the missile for years .
 North Korea soon will have a missile with an expected range of 5,000-6,000 Im. Im. North Korea . North Korea has a missile that can reach up to 6,000 miles .
 North Korea could deliver a warhead to all countries in Southeast Asia, parts of Alaska, and the continental U.S. With this, the country could also be at risk .
 The North Koreans tested Taepodong-2 missile on July 4, 2005, unsuccessfully . The North Korea tested the missile unsuccessfully in 2005 .
 U.S. intelligence estimates that the weapon will take eleven years to become operational . The weapon could take that time to be operational, but production time could shorten .
 The Taepodong-2 could hit the western U.S. as well as other nations the Western hemisphere . It could also hit other nations as well . It is the first time the U.N. has been hit by a nuclear missile .
 The current model of the Taepodong-2 lacks the capacity to carry nuclear WEirheads to the U.S. The U.N. has no capacity to send nuclear warheads to the United States .
 With a light payload, Taepodong-2 could reach western parts of the Continental United States, though with poor accuracy . Former CIA director George Tenet has revealed that, with a light . payload, it could reach Western parts of . the Continental . United States .
 Proliferation has been opposed by many nations with and without nucleeir weapons . Governments fear that more countries with nuclear weapons may increase the possibility of nuclear warfare, de-stabilize international or regional relations .
 The United States was the first and only country to have used a nuclear weapon in war . The U.S. used two bombs against Japan in August 1945 when it used two nuclear bombs .
 With their loss during the war, Germany and Japan ceased to be involved in any nuclear weapon research . Japan and Germany were involved in nuclear weapons research .
 India exploded a nuclear device in 1974, and Pakistan tested a weapon in 1998 . Pakistan exploded a bomb in 1998, and India exploded an atomic bomb in 1974 .
 None of the efforts were explicitly public, owing to the fact that the weapon developments themselves were kept secret until the bombing of Hiroshima . None of these efforts were publicly made public .
 The Baruch Plan of 1946 was named after Bernard Baruch, America's first representative to the U.N. Atomic Energy Commission . The plan was proposed by the Truman Administration in 1946 .
 Eisenhower made his "Atoms for Peace" proposal before the U.N. General Assembly in 1953 . Still, it remained official American policy until 1953 .
 Under the ""Atoms for Peace" program thousands of scientists from around the world were educated in nuclear science and then dispatched home . Many later pursued secret weapons programs in their home country .
 In June 1968, the United Nations General Assembly endorsed the NPT with General Assembly Resolution 2373 . NPT opened for signature in Washington, DC, London and Moscow in July 1968 .
 The scientific and technical means for weapons construction to develop rudimentary, but working, nuclear explosive devices are considered to be within the reach of industrialized nations . Other than the acquisition of these special materials, the . means for . weapons construction is considered within the . reach of nations .
 The IAEA operates a safeguards system as specified under Article HI of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 . The safeguards system aims to ensure that civil stocks of uranium, plutonium, as well as facilities and technologies associated with these nuclear materials are used only for peaceful purposes .
 It is often argued that proliferation of nuclear weapons to many other states has been prevented by the extension of assurances and mutual defence treaties to these states by nuclear powers . Other factors, such as national prestige, or specific historical experiences, also play a part in hastening or stopping nuclear proliferation .
 Dual use technolo'gy refers to the possibility of military use of civilian nuclear power technology . Dual use technology is a term used to refer to the use of military nuclear technology .
 Many technologies and materials associated With the creation of a nuclear power program have a dual-use capability . They can be used to make nuclear weapons if a country chooses to do so . The materials and technologies associated with nuclear power programs can also be used as weapons .
 A fundamental goal for American and global security is to minimize the nuclear proliferation risks associated with the expansion of nuclear power . The U.S. should minimize nuclear proliferation risk associated with expanding nuclear power, author says .
 These characteristics include low degrees of corruption, high degrees of political stability, high governmental effectiveness scores and a strong degree of regulatory competence . These characteristics also include low levels of corruption .
 As of 9 October 2006, North Korea clearly possesses the capability to make a nuclear explosive device . The legality of North Korea's withdrawal from North Korea is debatable . North Korea has the ability to make nuclear devices .
 Allied to this role is the administration of safeguards arrangements to provide assurance to the international community that individual countries are honoring their commitments under the treaty . The safeguards arrangements are intended to provide assurances to the world that individuals are honoring commitments .
 The IAEA reports to both the United Nations General Assembly and the Security Council . Though established under its own international treaty, the agency reports to the U.N. General Assembly .
 The IAEA regularly inspects civil nuclear facilities to verify the accuracy of documentation supplied to it . The nuclear watchdog is now working with Russia to verify accuracy of the documents supplied .
 Safeguards designed to deter diversion of nuclear material by increasing the risk of early detection . Safeguard is designed to increase the risk early detection of early nuclear material .
 The controls are complemented by controls on the export of sensitive technology from countries such as UK and U.S. through voluntary bodies such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group .
 The main concern of the IAEA is that uranium not be enriched beyond what is necessary for commercial civil plants, and that plutonium produced by nuclear reactors not be refined into a form suitable for bomb production .
 Traditional safeguards are arrangements to account for and control the use of nuclear materials . Traditional safeguards include account for, control and control of nuclear material . Nuclear materials are used in nuclear weapons .
 This verification is a key element in the international system which ' ensures that uranium in particular is used only for peaceful purposes'
 Operators of nuclear facilities must declare detailed accounting records of all movements and transactions involving nuclear material . Operators must also declare detailed accounts for all movements of nuclear material in order to keep records .
 Inspections by the IAEA are complemented by other measures such as surveillance cameras and instrumentation . Inspections are also complemented with other measures including surveillance cameras .
 The inspections act as an alert system providing a warning of the possible diversion of nuclear material from peaceful activities, 'fhe system relies on; 1. Inspections act as a warning system providing . a warning . of the potential diversion of . nuclear material .
 Material Accountancy tracking all inward and outward transfers and the flow of materials in any nuclear facility . Material accountancy tracks all inward, outward transfers of nuclear materials .
 Containment and Surveillance — use of seals, automatic cameras and other instruments to detect unreported movement or tampering with nuclear materials . Seats, cameras and instruments are used to detect movement of nuclear materials, as well as spot checks .
 Facility-specific safeguards apply in the five weapons states plus the non-NPT states . In the weapons states, facility-specific facility safeguards apply .
 IAEA inspectors regularly visit these facilities to verify completeness and accuracy of records . Inspectors regularly visit the facilities in order to verify the accuracy of the records .
 The terms of the NPT cannot be enforced by the IAEA itself, nor can nations be forced to sign the treaty . The terms are not enforceable by the NAEA, nor by nations signing the treaty. The terms will not be enforced .
 In Iraq and North Korea, safeguards can be backed up by diplomatic, political and economic measures . In reality, as shown in Iraq and N. Korea, these safeguards can back up by diplomacy, political, economic measures, experts say .
 In the 1990s attention turned to what might not have been declared . Traditional safeguards easily verified the correctness of formal declarations by suspect states .
 North Korea attempted to use research reactors and a reprocessing plant to produce some weapons-grade plutonium . North Korea has been accused of using research reactors to make plutonium . The North Korean government has been criticized for its actions .
 The weakness of the NPT regime lay in the fact that no obvious diversion of material was involved in the smuggling of material, says NPT .
 The uranium used as fuel probably came from indigenous sources . The nuclear facilities were built by the countries themselves without being declared or placed under safeguards .
 Iraq, as an NPT party, was obliged to declare all facilities but did not do so . Iraq as a member of the NPT, Iraq did not declare its facilities as required .
 The activities were detected and brought under control using international diplomacy . Nevertheless, the activities were not detected by the international community .
 North Korea's activities took place before the conclusion of its NPT safeguards agreement . In North Korea, the activities concerned took place . The activities concerned were taken place before conclusion of the agreement .
 With North Korea, promised provision of commercial power reactors appeared to resolve the situation for a time . North Korea later withdrew from the NTT and declared it had nuclear weapons .
 In 1993 a program was initiated to strengthen and extend the classical safeguards system . A model protocol was agreed by the IAEA Board of Governors 1997 . Additional Protocol Additional Protocol
 The measures boosted the IAEA's ability to detect undeclared nuclear activities . They include those with no connection to the civil fuel cycle . The measures were boosted by the measures .
 Some could be implemented on the basis of IAEA's existing legal authority through safeguards agreements and inspections . Some of the proposals could be carried out under existing safeguards agreements, inspections .
 Others required further legal authority to be confen-ed through an Additional Protocol . The Additional Protocol is a form of confederalism that confers more powers .
 This must be agreed by, each non-weapons state with IAEA, as a supplement to any existing comprehensive safeguards agreement . Each non-weapon state must agree to this form of agreement with the IAEa .
 Weapons states have agreed to accept the principles of the model additional protocol . Weapons states will be able to use the concept of the new protocol in the future .
 The IAEA is to be given considerably more information on nuclear and nuclearrelated activities . The information will include R & D, production of uranium and thorium, and nuclear-related imports and exports .
 The IAEA can deploy environmental sampling and remote monitoring techniques to detect illicit activities . This will include any suspect location, it can be at short notice .
 States must streamline administrative procedures so IAEA inspectors can get automatic visa renewal . States must also communicate more readily with IAEa headquarters, says U.S. official .
 Further evolution of safeguards is towards evaluation of each state, taking account of its particular situation and the kind of nuclear materials it has . Further evolution is needed to take account of each country's situation and its nuclear materials .
 This will involve greater judgement on the part of IAEA and the development of effective methodologies which reassure NPT States. This will require greater judgement, IAEa and the .
 The IAEA is also applying the measures of the Additional Protocol in Taiwan . The Additional Protocol is also applied to Taiwan .
 Egypt says it will not sign the Additional Protocol until israei accepts comprenensive IAEA safeguards . Brazil opposes the protocol, but has not ruled out signing it .
 The greatest risk from nuclear weapons proliferation comes from countries which have not joined the NPT and which have significant unsafeguarded nuclear activities . India, Pakistan, and Israel fall within this category .
 While safeguards apply to some of their activities, others remain beyond scrutiny . Some safeguards apply only to certain activities, such as security measures .
 Bilateral agreements, such as Australia and Canada for sale of uranium, address this by including fallback provisions . But many countries are outside the scope of these agreements, including many outside of these .
 If a nuclear-capable country does leave the NPT, it is likely to be reported by the IAEA to the UN Security Council . It would be reported as if it were in breach of its safeguards agreement .
 IAEA safeguards, together with bilateral safeguards applied under the NPT, can, and do, ensure that uranium supplied by Australia and Canada does not contribute to nuclear weapons proliferation .
 World trade in uranium for nuclear electricity makes proliferation of nuclear weapons less likely . In fact, the worldwide application of those safeguards and the substantial world trade of uranium make the proliferation less likely, he says .
 The Additional Protocol will provide credible assurance that there are no undeclared nuclear materials or activities in the states concerned . The Protocol, once it is widely in force, will provide . credible assurance . that there is no undedeclared nuclear material or activities .
 The Nuclear Suppliers Group communicated its guidelines, essentially a set of export rules, to the IAEA in 1978 .
 Guidelines also recognised the need for physical protection measures in the transfer of sensitive facilities, technology and weapons-usable materials .
 The group began with seven members — the United States, the former USSR, the UK, France, Germany, Canada, Canada and Japan . It now includes 46 countries including all five nuclear weapons states .
 It is seen as an important litmus test on the seriousness of the U.S. intention to nuclear disarm .
 This radioactive superheavy hydrogen isotope is used to boost the efficiency of fissile materials in nuclear weapons . It is used in the production process of nuclear weapons in the U.S. It is believed to be the most powerful isotope in the world .
 The United States resumed tritium production in 2003 for the first time in 15 years . The U.S. resumed the production of the element in 2003 . Tritium is a radioactive substance .
 This could indicate that there is a potential nuclear arm stockpile replacement since the isotope naturally decays . This could be a potential replacement for the nuclear arms since the nuclear arm has been developed .
 In May 1995, NPT parties reaffirmed their commitment to a Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty to prohibit the production of any further fissile material for weapons . The treaty was ratified by the NPT in 1995 .
 This aims to complement the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty of 1996 and codify 74 International Relations commitments made by the United States, the UK, France, Russia and Russia to cease production of weapons material . The U.S. and UK, Russia, France and Russia are among the countries to
 This treaty will also put more pressure on Israel, India and Pakistan to agree to international verification . The treaty is expected to put pressure on the countries to agree on verification .
 Ayatollah Ali Khamenei issued a fatwa forbidding the production, stockpiling and use of nuclear weapons in 2005 . The fatwa was issued on 9 August 2005, banning nuclear weapons .
 Khamenei's official statement was made at the meeting of the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna . Khamenei made the statement at the IAEA meeting of Vienna .
 Iran formally announced that uranium enrichment within their borders has continued in 2006 . As of February 2006 Iran announced that it had continued .
 Iran claims it is for peaceful purposes but the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the U.S. claim the purpose is for nuclear weapons research and construction . Iran says it is not for weapons research, but for nuclear research .
 Non-Signatories India, Pakistan and Israel have been ""threshold" countries in terms of the international non-proliferation regime . Non-signatories India and Pakistan have been 'threshold' countries . Israel and Israel are considered to be the third countries in the NPT
 They possess or are quickly capable of assembling one or more nuclear weapons, they say . They say they are quickly able to assemble one of the world's most powerful nuclear weapons .
 They are largely excluded from trade in nuclear plant or materials, except for safety-related devices for a few safeguarded facilities . They are thus largely excluded .
 In May 1998 India and Pakistan each exploded several nuclear devices underground . The nuclear devices were detonated underground in Pakistan and India .
 This heightened concerns regarding an arms race between them, with Pakistan involving the People's Republic of China, an acknowledged nuclear weapons state . Pakistan is one of the most populous countries in the world with nuclear weapons .
 India has consistently attacked the Treaty since its inception in 1970 . Both countries are opposed to the NPT as it stands, and India has repeatedly attacked the treaty .
 Relations between the two countries are tense and hostile, and the risks of nuclear conflict between them have long been considered quite high . Relations between North Korea and the U.S. have been described as hostile and tense .
 Kashmir is a prime cause of bilateral tension, its sovereignty being in dispute since 1948 . Kashmir is one of the world's most disputed areas of Kashmir .
 There is persistent low level military conflict due to Pakistan backing an insurgency there and the disputed status of Kashmir . Kashmir is a major source of conflict between Pakistan and Pakistan .
 Both engaged in a conventional arms race in the 1980s, including sophisticated technology and equipment capable of delivering nuclear weapons . The two countries engaged in an arms race .
 In 1994 India reversed a four-year trend of reduced allocations for defence . Despite its much smaller economy, Pakistan was expected to push its own expenditures .
 The growth of China's nuclear arsenal and its assistance with Pakistan's nuclear power programme exacerbate Indian concerns . But it is the growth and modernization of the Chinese arsenal, which exacerbate India's concerns .
 Pakistan is aided by China's People's Liberation Army, which operates autonomously within that country as an exporter of military material . Pakistan has been aided by Pakistan's military might in recent years .
 This self-sufficiency extends from uranium exploration and mining to heavy water production, reactor design and reactor design .
 It is developing technology to utilise its abundant resources of thorium as a nuclear fuel .
 India has 14 small nuclear power reactors in commercial operation, two larger ones under construction, and ten more planned . India has two larger reactors under construction .
 Construction has been seriously delayed by financial and technical problems . Construction of the project has been severely delayed by technical and financial problems .
 In 2001 a final agreement was signed with Russia for the country's first large nuclear power plant, comprising two VVER-1000 reactors, under a Russian-financed US$3 billion contract . The plant will be the first of its kind in Russia and will be built in Russia's
 Nuclear power supplied 3.1% of India's electricity in 2000 and this was expected to reach 10% by 2005 . Nuclear power supply is expected to grow to 10% of the country's electricity by 2005.
 Its industry is largely without IAEA safeguards, though a few plants are under facility-specific safeguards . The U.S. nuclear industry relies heavily on the safety of its plants .
 The weapons material appears to come from a Canadian-designed 40MW ""research"" reactor which started up in 1960, well before the NPT, and a lOOMW indigenous unit in operation since 1985 .
 It is estimated that India may have built up enough weapons-grade plutonium for a hundred nuclear warheads . India and Pakistan used CANDli reactors to pfoduceTissionable materials for their weapons .
 India used the Canadian-supplied reactor and heavy water to produce plutonium for their first nuclear explosion . India, in violation of these agreements, used the reactor and American heavy water for the first nuclear blast .
 The country has at least three other research reactors . The tiny one is exploring the use of thorium as a nuclear fuel, by breeding fissile U-233 .
 In addition, an advanced heavy-water thorium cycle is under development . In addition to the thorium cycles, a thorium-freezing cycle is also being developed .
 India exploded a nuclear device in 1974, the so-called Smiling Buddha test . It has consistently claimed it was for peaceful purposes . India exploded the device in a nuclear test in 1974 .
 Others saw it as a response to China's nuclear weapons capability . Others said it was a reaction to the country's nuclear capability .
 It was then universally perceived, notwithstanding official denials, to possess, or to be able to quickly assemble, nuclear weapons . The U.S. was then widely perceived to possess or to have, or . to . quickly assembled, nuclear arms .
 In 1999 China deployed its own medium-range missile and has developed intermediate-range missiles . The missiles are capable of reaching targets in China's industrial heartland . In 1999, China deployed the first medium range missile to its own military base .
 The U.S. quietly intervened to head off a proposed nuclear test in 1995 . In 1995 the United States quietly intervened in a planned nuclear test .
 After an uneasy ceasefire ended the 1962 war, relations between the two nations were frozen until 1998 . Relations between North Korea and South Korea have been frozen since 1998 .
 Since then a degree of high-level contact has been established and a few elementary confidence-building measures put in place . Since then, the relationship between the two countries has been strained .
 China still occupies some territory which it captured during the war, claimed by India, and India still occupy some territory claimed by China . India also occupies some of China's territory .
 Its nuclear weapon and missile support for Pakistan is a major bone of contention . Pakistan's nuclear weapon, missile and nuclear weapon support for the country is also a major issue . The U.S. has a long history of supporting Pakistan in the region .
 American President George W Bush met with India Prime Minister Manmohan Singh to discuss India's involvement with nuclear weapons . Bush and Singh met in New Delhi to discuss the issue .
 The two countries agreed that the United States would give nuclear power assistance to India . The U.S. and India agreed to give the assistance to the country .
 China supplying low-enriched uranium fuel for these PWRs, along with two additional reactors . China is supplying the fuel for the reactors . The PWR is the first reactor to be built in China .
 Pakistan also has a 9 MW research reactor of 1965 vintage . There are persistent reports of a 50 MW PHWR near Khushab, which is presumed to have potential for producing weapons plutonium .
 Pakistan has also produced nuclear weapons, using indigenous uranium to produce both highly enriched uranium and, more recently, plutonium . The country has also made nuclear weapons .
 In 1990 the United States cut off military assistance to Pakistan because it was unable to certify that Pakistan was not pursuing a policy of manufacturing nuclear weapons . The U.S. cut off the aid to Pakistan in 1990 due to a lack of confidence .
 Pakistan made it clear in early 1996 that it had done the basic development work, and that if India staged a nuclear test, Pakistan would immediately start assembling its own nuclear explosive device . Pakistan said in 1996 it had already assembled its own device .
 It is assumed to now have enqiigh highly-enriched 77 uranium for up to forty nuclear warheads . The U.S. is believed to have enough uranium for 40 warheads .
 In May 1998, Pakistan conducted six underground tests in the Chagai Hills, five on the 28th and one on the 30th of that month . Within weeks of India's nuclear tests, Pakistan announced that it had conducted 6 underground tests .
 In the 1970s, Pakistan first focused on the plutonium route, expecting to obtain the fissile material from a reprocessing plant to be provided by France . Pakistan's first focus was on plutonium .
 Pakistan, not wanting to give up, redoubled its efforts to obtain uranium enrichment technology . Pakistan has not given up on its quest to obtain the technology .
 Khan had access to classified data used to enrich ordinary uranium to weapons grade concentrations . Khan was in charge of uranium enrichment at the time of the U.S. effort .
 In 1974 while he was on secondment for 17 days as a translator to the URENCO plant in Almelo, he obtained photographs and documents of the plant .
 Khan returned to Pakistan in 1976 and initiated the Uranium enrichment program on the basis of the technology he had stolen from his previous employer . Khan returned in 1976 to Pakistan and started the program in 1976 .
 The British Government stopped the British subsidiary of the American Emerson Electric Co from shipping the nuclear technplogy to Pakistan . After the British government stopped the company shipping the technology to Pakistan, Dr. Dr. Ghaffar Hussain said he would not be allowed to send the technology .
 Khan describes his fhistration with a supplier from Germany as ""That man from the German team was unethical" Khan describes the supplier as "unethical" Khan also describes his relationship with a German supplier as unethical .
 In 2003, the IAEA unearthed a nuclear black market with close ties to Pakistan . The black market was found in 2003, with ties to the country's nuclear industry .
 It is widely believed to have been Pakistan's involvement in the attack . The government is believed to be directly involved in the incident .
 The claim could not be verified due to the refusal of the government of Pakistan to allow IAEA to interview the alleged head of the nuclear black market, who happened to be Dr. Dr. Ghaffar Hussain .
 Khan later confessed to his crimes on national television, bailing out the government by taking full responsibility . Khan later took full responsibility for the government's actions . Khan's confession came after he was forced to confess to the crimes .
 He confessed to nuclear proliferation from Pakistan to Iran and North Korea and confessed to Pakistan's nuclear proliferation . He also confessed to Iran, North Korea .
 The manner in which the government acted cast doubt on the sincerity of Pakistan . Exact nature of the involvement at the governmental level is still unclear, but it casts doubt on Pakistan's sincerity .
 North Korea believed to be diverting plutonium extracted from the fuel of its reactor at Yongbyon, for use in nuclear weapons .
 North Korea threatened to withdraw from the NPT in 1993 . The subsequent confrontation with IAEA on the issue of inspections and suspected violations resulted in North Korea threatening to withdraw .
 Agreed Framework of 1994 provided for IAEA safeguards being applied to its reactors and spent fuel rods . This eventually led to negotiations with the United States resulting in the Agreed framework of 1994 .
 The spent fuel rods were sealed in canisters by the U.S. to prevent North Korea from extracting plutonium from them . The United States sealed the rods in a sealed canisters to prevent them being extracted . North Korea has not been able to extract plutonium from the rods .
 Pakistan-Noith cooperation in missile technology transfer was being established . Pakistan and Noith cooperation was established during this period . During this period, Pakistan was being given cooperation with Noith .
 A high level Pakistani military visited North Korea in August-September 1992 . The visit was reportedly to discuss the supply of Scuu missile technology to Pakistan .
 The visits are believed to be related to the subsequent acquisition of Ghauri (North Korean No-dong) missiles by Pakistan . Pakistan is believed to have acquired Ghauri missiles from North Korea .
 At this time China was under U.S. pressure not to supply the M series of missiles to Pakistan . Pakistan was given the missiles by China in 1998 .
 Reports indicate that North Korea was willing to supply missile sub-systems including rocket motors, inertial guidanee systems, control and testing equipment of Scud SSMs for US$ 50 million . North Korea reportedly willing to buy rocket motors and inertial guidance systems .
 Analysts had begun to question what North Korea received in pay for the missiles . Many suspected it was nuclear technology and components .
 Khan's KRL was in charge of both Pakistan's uranium enrichment program and also of the missile program with North Korea . Khan also oversaw Pakistan's nuclear program with the North Korean government .
 It is likely during this period that cooperation in nuclear technology between Pakistan and North Korea was initiated . It is thought to have been initiated during the period of cooperation .
 North Korea supplied Pakistan with missiles, report says . Equipment such as gas centrifuges appeared to have been 'part of a barter deal'
 U.S. intelligence had as early as 1999 picked up signs that North Korea was continuing to develop nuclear arms, reports say . Separate reports indicate that United States intelligence had been monitoring North Korea's nuclear program .
 Israel is thought to have an arsenal of potentially up to several hundred nuclear warheads . Israel is also thought to possess potentially hundreds of nuclear warheads based on estimates .
 This has never been openly confirmed or denied however, due to Israels policy of deliberate ambiguity . Israel has a policy of deliberately ambiguous ambiguity .
 An Israeli nuclear installation is located about ten kilometers to the south of Dimona . The Negev Nuclear Research Center is located in the Negeva .
 The purpose of the Dimona plant is widely assumed to be the manufacturing of nuclear weapons . The majority of defense experts have concluded that it does in fact do that .
 There were no ""safeguards" required in this deal to prevent usage of the hea-'/y water for non-peaceful purposes . There were also no 'safeguardards' required in the deal .
 British newspaper Daily Express accused Israel of working on a bomb in 1960 . Daily Express said Israel was working on an Israeli bomb bomb .
 The U.S. intelligence community discovered the purpose of the Dimona plant in the early 1960s . It demanded that Israel agree to international inspections of the plant . The plant was later shut down .
 Israel agreed, but on a condition that U.S., rather than IAEA, inspectors were used, were used . Israel would receive advanced notice of all inspections . Israel agreed to the deal on condition that Israel would get advance notice .
 In 1986, Mordechai Vanunu, a former technician at the Dimona plant, revealed to the media some evidence of Israel's nuclear program . In Israel, Israel has a history of nuclear testing .
 Israeli agents arrested him from Italy, drugged him and transported him to Israel . Israeli court then tried him in secret on charges of treason and espionage, and sentenced him to eighteen years imprisonment .
 He was freed on 21 April 2004, but was severely limited by the Israeli government . He was released in April 2004 .
 He was arrested again on 11 November 2004, though formal charges were not immediately filed . He was also arrested again in November 2004 .
 Comments on photographs taken by Mordechai Vanunu inside Negev Nuclear Research Center have been made by prominent scientists .
 Ted Taylor, a bomb designer employed by the United States of America has confirmed the several hundred warhead estimate based on the photographs .
 The public stance ""of the two states on non-proliferation differs markedly. The two states' stances differ markedly.
 India has repeatedly proposed a nuclear free zone in South Asia . It has proclaimed its willingness to engage in nuclear disarmament and to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
 It has endorsed a U.S. proposal for a regional five power conference to consider non-proliferation in South Asia . It has also endorsed a United States proposal for the conference .
 India has taken the view that solutions to regional security issues should be found at the international rather than the regional level . Its chief concern is with China, says India .
 The 'Gandhi Plan' put forward in 1988, proposed the revision of the NonProliferation Treaty, which it regards as inherently discriminatory in favor of the nuclearweapon States, and a timetable for complete nuclear weapons disarmament .
 It endorsed early proposals for a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and for an international convention to ban the production of highly enriched uranium and plutonium for weapons purposes .
 The Clinton administration proposed a conference of the five nuclear-weapon states, Japan, Germany, India and Pakistan . The conference would take place in Japan and Germany .
 India refused this and similar previous proposals, and countered with demands that other potential weapons states, such as Iran and North Korea, should be invited . India said regional limitations would only be acceptable if they were accepted equally by China .
 The U.S. would not accept the participation of Iran and North Korea and these initiatives have lapsed, the president says . The United States would not participate in the talks, he says .
 India and the U.S. jointly sponsored a UN General Assembly resolution in 1993 calling for negotiations for a 'cut-off convention' to end the conflict .
 Should India and Pakistan join such a convention, they would have to agree to halt the production of fissile materials for weapons and accept international verification on their relevant nuclear facilities .
 It appears that India is now prepared to join negotiations regarding such a Cut-off Treaty . The UN Conference on Disarmament is scheduled to take place under the treaty .
 Bilateral confidence-building measures between India and Pakistan to reduce the prospects of confrontation have been limited . Bilateral confidence-building measures between the two countries are limited to date .
 In 1990 each side ratified a treaty not to attack the other's nuclear installations, and at the end of 1991 they provided one another with a list showing the location of all their nuclear plants .
 Early in 1994 India proposed a bilateral agreement for a 'no first use' of nuclear weapons . The 'no attack' treaty was extended to cover civilian targets as well as nuclear installations .
 India dropped its support in 1995 and in 1996 attempted to block the Treaty . Having promoted the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty since 1954, India dropped support in 1996 . In 1996, India tried to stop the Treaty from being ratified .
 The Indian ratification may be conditional upon the five weapons states agreeing to specific reductions in nuclear arsenals . The five states may also agree to specific reduction in their arsenals, experts say .
 The UN Conference on Disarmament has also called upon both countries ""to accede without delay to the Non-Proliferation Treaty"", presumably as non-weapons states . The conference also called on both countries to accede to the non-proliferation treaty .
 In 2007 and 2008, high enriched and low enriched uranium particles were found in environmental samples taken in Egypt . In 2008 and 2009, high and low enrichment uranium particles found in Egyptian environmental samples .
 In 2008, the IAEA states Egypt's statements were consistent with its ovm findings . Egypt's statement was consistent with the findings of the ovm report . Egypt has been accused of using the information to justify its actions .
 In May 2009, Reuters reported that the IAEA was conducting further investigation in Egypt . Reuters reported in May 2009 that the investigation was ongoing .
 In 2003, the IAEA reported that Iran had been in breach of its obligations to comply with provisions of its safeguard agreement . Iran was found to have breached the agreement in 2003 . Iran has been accused of violating the agreement .
 In 2005, the IAEA Board of Governors voted in a rare non-consensus decision to find Iran in non-compliance with its 81 NPT Safeguards Agreement . The UN Security Council passed a series of resolutions in response to concerns about the program .
 Iran's representative to the UN argues sanctions compel Iran to abandon its rights under the Nuclear Nonproproliferation Treaty to peaceful nuclear technology . Iran says sanctions will compel Iran's refusal to comply with the N.N. Treaty .
 Iran says its uranium enrichment program is exclusively for peaceful purposes . Iran says it has enriched uranium to ""less than 5 percent,"" consistent with fuel for a nuclear power plant . That's below the purity of WEU typically used in a weapons program .
 The director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Yukiya Amano, said in 2009 he had not seen any evidence in IAEA official documents that Iran was developing nuclear weapons . Amano: "IAEA has no evidence that Iran is developing nuclear arms"
 Up to the late 1980s it was generally assumed that any undeclared nuclear activities would have to be based on the diversion of nuclear material from safeguards . Iraq is the first country to admit to having a nuclear program .
 States acknowledged the possibility of nuclear activities entirely separate from those covered by safeguards . It was assumed they would be detected by national intelligence activities .
 Iraq has been making efforts to secure a nuclear potential since the 1960s . Iraq had been trying to secure nuclear potential for the country since then .
 In the late 1970s a specialised plant, Osiraq, was constructed near Baghdad . The plant was built in the late 1980s .
 The plant was attacked during the Iran-Iraq War and was destroyed by Israeli bombers in June 1981 .
 Not until the 1990 NPT Review Conference did some states raise the possibility of making more use of provisions for ""special inspections" in existing NPT Safeguards Agreements .
 Special inspections can be undertaken at locations other than those where safeguards routinely apply . If there is reason to believe there may be undeclared material or activities, the inspections will be carried out .
 After inspections in Iraq showed the extent of Iraq's clandestine nuclear weapons program, it became clear that the IAEA would have to broaden the scope of its activities .
 Inspections revealed Iran had been pursuing an extensive clandestine uranium enrichment programme . But inspections revealed that it had also been pursuing a nuclear weapons design programme . Iran also pursued a clandestine programme of uranium enrichment as well as nuclear weapons .
 The main thrust of Iraq's uranium enrichment program was the development of technology for electromagnetic isotope separation of indigenous uranium . The country's main thrust was to develop technology to separate indigenous uranium from other uranium .
 Ions of uranium-238 and uranium-235 are separated because they describe arcs of different radii when they move through a magnetic field . Ions are separated from each other because of the arcs of each of their radii .
 This process was used in the Manhattan Project to make the highly enriched uranium used in Hiroshima bomb . It was abandoned soon afterwards .
 The Iraqis did the basic research work at their nuclear research establishment at Tuwaitha, near Baghdad . They were building two full-scale facilities at Tarmiya and Ash Sharqat, north of Baghdad .
 Only a few separators had been installed at Tarmiya, and none at Ash Sharqat . When the war broke out, only a few were installed .
 The Iraqis were also very interested in centrifuge enrichment . They had acquired some components including some carbon-fibre rotors, which they were testing .
 They were clearly in violation of their NPf and safeguards obligations, and the IAEA Board of Governors ruled to that effect . The decision was made by the board of governors . QZ: "IAEA board of Governors rules that they were in violation"
 The UN Security Council ordered the IAEA to remove, destroy or render harmless Iraq's nuclear weapons capability . Iraq's nuke capability was deemed harmless by the UN . The UN had to remove or destroy Iraq's weapons capability to render harmless .
 This was done by mid 1998, but Iraq then ceased all cooperation with the UN, so the IAEA withdrew from this work . This was then when Iraq stopped cooperating with the United Nations .
 The revelations from Iraq provided the impetus for a very far-reaching reconsideration of what safeguards are intended to achieve . The revelations have prompted a rethink of the way safeguards are supposed to be implemented .
 Two Myanmarese defectors say Myanmar junta is secretly building a nuclear reactor and plutonium extraction facility with North Korea's help . The aim of acquiring its first nuclear bomb in five years is to acquire its first in five .
 Myanmar notified IAEA of its intention to pursue civilian nuclear programme in 2002 . Myanmar had notified the agency of its intent to pursue the programme . In 2002, Myanmar notified the IAEa of its intentions to pursue a civilian nuclear program .
 Russia announced it would build a nuclear reactor in Myanmar . Later, Russia announced that it would be building a reactor in the country .
 There have also been reports that two Pakistani scientists, from the AQ Khan stable, had been dispatched to Myanmar to help Myanmar's project .
 Recently, the David Albright-led Institute for Science and International Security rang alarm bells about Myanmar attempting to build a nuclear project with North Korean help .
 If true, the full weight of international pressure will be brought against Myanmar, officials say . Officials familiar with developments say international pressure is expected to be brought on Myanmar .
 The information that has been peddled by the defectors is also ""preliminary"" and could be used by the west to turn the screws on Myanmar . But equally, the information is also "reliminary" The information could also be used in the run-up to the 2010
 U.S. secretary of state Hillary Clinton highlighted concerns of the North Korean link in July 2009 . North Korea is a major source of tension in the region .
 It delayed concluding its NPT Safeguards Agreement with the IAEA, which should take only 18 months, until April 1992 .
 During that period, it brought into operation a small gas-cooled, graphitemoderated, natural-uranium fuelled ""Experimental Power Reactor"" of about 25 MWt .
 While this was well-suited design to start a wholly indigenous nuclear reactor development, it also exhibited all the features of a small plutonium production reactor for weapons purposes .
 Construction halted on both in 1994 and has not resumed .
 Both reactors have degraded consideraoly since that time and would take significant efforts to refurbish them .
 If the fuel was only irradiated to a very low bum-up, it would have been in a form suitable for weapons .
 There was always the risk that at some stage, the DPRK would withdraw from the NPT and use the plutonium for weapons . Although all these facilities at Yongbyon were to be under safeguards, there was always a risk that .
 IAEA to verify initial stocks of uranium and plutonium to ensure that all the nuclear materials in the country have been declared for safeguards purposes . One of the first steps in applying NPT safeguards is to verify the initial stocks . The NPT should be applied to apply to the NPT
 Information passed to the IAEA by a Member State supported that suggestion by indicating that the DPRK had two undeclared waste or other storage sites . The DPRK is believed to have two undedeclared waste sites .
 In February 1993 the IAEA called on the DPRK to allow special inspections of the two sites so that the initial stocks of nuclear material could be verified . The DPRK is believed to be the only country in the world to have nuclear weapons .
 In April 1993 the IAEA Board concluded that the DPRK was in non-compliance with its safeguards obligations and reported the matter to the UN Security Council . The DPRK was reported to the Security Council in April 1993 .
 In June 1993 the DPRK announeed that it had ""suspended"" its withdrawal from the NPT, but subsequently claimed a ""special status"" with respect to its safeguards obligations . In June 1994 the DPRK claimed a "special status" with regards to its safeguards obligations
 The DPRK's non-compliance had been reported to the UN Security Council . The essential part of the IAEA's mission had been completed . North Korea's refusal to comply with the UN has been reported by the UN .
 Some 8,000 corroding fuel rods associated with the experimental reactor have remained under close surveillance .
 Following bilateral negotiations between the United States and the DPRK, the IAEA has been given additional responsibilities . Following the conclusion of the Agreed Framework in October 1994, the U.S. and the . DPRK have bilateral talks .
 The agreement requires a freeze on the operation and construction of the DPRK's plutonium production reactors and their related facilities . The IAEA is responsible for monitoring the freeze until the facilities are eventually dismantled .
 The DPRK remains uncooperative with the IAEA verification work and has yet to comply with its safeguards agreement . The DPRK is uncooperated with the verification work .
 Iraq was defeated in a war, allowing the UN the opportunity to seek out and destroy its nuclear weapons programme as part of the cease-fire conditions . The DPRK was not defeated, nor was it vulnerable to other measures, such as trade sanctions .
 Sanctions on vital commodities, such as oil, would either be ineffective or risk provoking war . It can scarcely afford to import anything, and sanctions are either ineffective or provoke war . Sanctions would either risk provoking a war, or failing to stop the flow of oil .
 The DPRK was persuaded to stop what appeared to be its nuclear weapons programme in exchange for about US$5 billion in energy-related assistance . Under the agreed framework, the DPRK agreed to stop its nukes in exchange .
 This included two 1000 MWe light water nuclear power reactors based on an advanced U.S. System-80 design . The reactors were based on the advanced United States System 80 design .
 Six-party talks began in April 2004 concerning North Korea's weapons program . In response, a series of discussions among the DPRK, the U.S. and China were held in Beijing .
 On 10 January 2005, North Korea declared that it was in the possession of nuclear weapons . The North Korean government declared that the country had nuclear weapons in 2005 . North Korea was declared to have nuclear weapons by 2005 .
 By the end of 2005 the DPRK had halted all six-party talks because the United States froze certain DPRK international financial assets such as those in a bank in Macau . The United States had frozen certain DPRK financial assets .
 On 9 October 2006, North Korea announced that it has performed its first-ever nuclear weapon test . North Korea said in 2006 that it had performed the first ever nuclear test .
 On 13 February 2007, parties announced ""Initial Actions"" to implement the 2005 joint statement including shutdown and disablement of North Korean nuclear facilities . In exchange for energy assistance, North Korea will shut down its nuclear facilities in exchange for nuclear assistance .
 North Korea withdrew from the six-party talks, restarted its nuclear facilities and conducted a second nuclear test on 25 May 2009 . North Korea conducted the second test in May 2009 after UN sanctions imposed after missile tests .
 Russia Security of nuclear weapons in Russia remains a matter of concern . Russia's security of nuclear arms in Russia is a major concern .
 Tretyakov had a meeting with two Russian businessmen representing a state-created Chetek corporation in 1991 . The meeting took place in 1991, according to a high-ranking Russian SVR defector . The two businessmen were representing a Russian state-run Chetek company .
 Novaya Zemlya is a project of destroying large quantities of chemical wastes collected from Western countries at the island . The project is based on a project to destroy large amounts of chemical waste collected from the West .
 The project was rejected by Canadian representatives, but one of the businessmen told Tretyakov that he keeps his own nuclear bomb at his dacha outside Moscow .
 Anyone with enough money can buy a nuclear bomb in Russia, says Russian President Vladimir Putin . Putin: "Anyone can buy nuclear bomb. With economic conditions they are in Russia today, anyone can buy it"
 In 1991, South Africa acceded to the NPT, concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA . South Africa has submitted a report on its nuclear material subject to safeguards . The South African nuclear material is subject to nuclear safeguards .
 At the time, the state had a nuclear power programme producing nearly 10% of the country's electricity . Iraq and North Korea had only had research reactors .
 The IAEA's initial verification task was complicated by South Africa's announcement that it built and then dismantled a number of nuclear weapons . South Africa announced between 1979 and 1989 that it had built and dismantled nuclear weapons between 1979-1989 . The South African nuclear weapons were dismantled in 1989 .
 South Africa asked the IAEA to verify the conelusion of its weapons programme . South Africa has asked for verification of its programme to be verified .
 In 1995 IAEA declared that it was satisfied all materials were accounted for and the weapons programme had been terminated and dismantled . In 1995 the IAEa declared that all materials had been accounted for .
 South Africa has signed the NPT, and now holds the distinction of being the only known state to have indigenously produced nuclear weapons, and then verifiably dismantled them . South Africa is now only known to be the only state to produce nuclear weapons .
 The alleged reactor was _____ not asserted to be operational and it was not asserted that nuclear material had been introduced into it . It was not claimed that the reactor was operational .
 Syria said the site was a military site and was not involved in any nuclear activities . Syria says the site is not a nuclear site . Syria said it was not a military base .
 The IAEA requested Syria to provide further access to the site and any other locations where debris and equipment from the building had been stored . Syria must also provide access to other locations, including the debris, equipment and equipment .
 S./ria denounced what it called the Western ""fabrication and forging of facts"" in regards to the incident .
 IAEA Director General Mohamed ElBaradei criticized the strikes . He deplored that information regarding the matter had not been shared with his agency earlier . ElBadei: "Information was not shared with the agency earlier. It is not the first time I have heard from such
 The United States has given the UK considerable assistance with nuclear weapon design and construction since the 1958 US-UK Mutual Defence Agreement . The UK and the U.S. have been involved in nuclear weapons design since 1958 .
 The United States President authorized the transfer of ""nuclear weapon parts"" to the UTC between at least the years 1975 to 1996 . The transfer of nuclear weapons parts was authorized between 1975 and 1996 .
 Some of the frssile materials for the UK Trident warhead were purchased from the United States . The UK Trident Warhead was made of materials from the U.S.
 Declassified U.S. Department of Energy documents indicate the UK Trident warhead system was involved in non-nuclear design activities alongside the United States W76 nuclear warhead . The Federation of American Scientists speculate that the UK warhead may share design information from the W76 .
 Under the Mutual Defence Agreement 5.37 tonnes of UK-produced plutonium was sent to the United States in return for 6 kg of tritium and 7. tonnes of highly enriched uranium over the period 1960-1979 .
 A further 0.47 tonne of plutonium was between the UK and the U.S. for reasons that remain classified .
 The renewal of this agreement is due to take place through the second decade of the 21st century . The renewal will take place between 2010 and 2015 .
 Arguments in favor of proliferation , , debate in the academic study of International Security as to the advisability of proliferation . Arguments against proliferation include arguments in favour of proliferation, .
 Pierre Marie Gallois of France argued in books like The Balance of Terror; Strategy for the Nuclear Age . Gallois argued that mere possession of a nuclear arsenal, what the French called the force de frappe, was enough .
 Scholars advocate some forms of nuclear proliferation arguing that it will decrease the likelihood of war, especially in troubled regions of the 86 International Relations world . These scholars argue that nuclear proliferation increases the likelihood that war will be avoided .
 Waltz argues that the logic of mutually assured destruction should work in all security environments, regardless of historical tensions or recent hostility . Waltz: "Mutually assured destruction" should be used in security environments .
 He sees the Cold War as the only occasion when enmity between two Great Powers did not result in military conflict . He sees it as the ultimate proof of MAD logic . The Cold War is the only time in history not to be military conflict between the two countries .
 This was, he argues, because nuclear weapons promote caution in decision-makers . This was because they promote caution, he says, in the form of nuclear weapons .
 Waltz believes there to be no reason why this effect would not occur in all circumstances . Waltz: "There are no reasons why this would not be the same thing as this" Waltz says .
 John Mearsheimer would not support Waltz's optimism in the majority of potential instances . However, he has argued for nuclear proliferation as policy in certain places such as post-Cold War Europe .
 Professor Mearsheimer opines that Europe is bound to return to its pre-Cold War environment of regular conflagration and suspicion at some point in the future .
 He advocates arming both Germany and the Ukraine with nuclear weaponry in order to achieve a balance of power between these states in the east and France/Britain in the west .
 If this does not occur, he is certain that war will eventually break out on the European continent, he says . If this doesn't occur, there will be war on the continent .
 Mearsheimer's selective distribution is the possibility of nuclear terrorism . Another argument against Waltz's open proliferation is that nuclear terrorism could be a possibility . Waltz has been criticized for his open proliferation .
 Some countries in laissez-faire distribution could predispose the transfer of nuclear materials or a bomb falling into the hands of groups not affiliated with any governments .
 Such countries would not have the political will or ability to safeguard attempts at devices being transferred to a third party . Such countries are not likely to be able to prevent attempts at transferring devices to third parties .
 Terrorism groups could push forth their own nuclear agendas or be used as shadow fronts to carry out the attack plans by mentioned governments . Not being deterred by selfannihilation, terrorism groups could use nuclear weapons as a cover .
 There are numerous arguments presented against selective and total proliferation, generally targeting the very neorealist assumptions its proponents tend to make . Arguments against both positions are presented against both selective and total proliferation .
 Mearsheimer argues that the economic integration of Europe through the development of the European Union has made war in most of the continent so disastrous economically so as to serve as an effective deterrent .
 Constructivists argue that EU political institutions have led or will lead to the development of a nascent European identity, which most states on the European continent wish to partake in to some degree or another . All states within the EU regard war between them as unthinkable .
 The general opinion is that most states are not in a position to safely guard against nuclear use, that Waltz under-estimates the long-standing antipathy in many regions . Weak states will be unable to prevent — or will actively provide for — the disastrous possibility of nuclear terrorism,
 Even the 1995 Norwegian rocket incident demonstrated a potential scenario in which Russian democratization and military downsizing at the end of the Cold War did not eliminate the danger of accidental nuclear war through command and control errors .
 Future world leaders might not understand how close the Soviets, Russians, and Americans were to doomsday, how easy it all seemed . Apocalypse was avoided for a mere 40 years between rivals, politicians not terrorists .
 If one state produces a nuclear w'eapon it creates almost a domino effect within the region . It creates almost an almost a 'domino effect' if one produces a nuke bomb .
 States in the region will seek to acquire nuclear weapons to balance or eliminate the security threat . States will try to acquire nukes to balance security threat, experts say .
 The Russians started to develop their program in preparation for the Cold War . The U.S. demonstrated that it had nuclear power capabilities after the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Russians started their program .
 With the Russian military buildup, France and Great Britain perceived this as a security threat, therefore they pursued nuclear weapons . France and Britain believed this was the security threat and pursued nuclear arms .
 The Clash of Civilizations is a theory, proposed by political scientist Samuel P Huntington, that people's cultural and religious identities will be the primary source of conflict in the post-Cold War world . People's cultural, religious identities are the primary sources of conflict .
 This theory was originally formulated in a 1992 lecture at the American Enterprise Institute . It was then developed in a 1993 Foreign Affairs article titled ""The Clash of Civilizations?" It was written in response to Francis Fukuyama's 1992 book .
 Huntington expanded his thesis in a 1996 book The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order . Huntington later expanded the thesis in his 1996 book . Huntington's thesis was later expanded into a book about the future of the world .
 This expression derives from clash of cultures, already used during the colonial period and the Belle Epoque . This expression was used during colonial period .
 Huntington began his thinking by surveying the diverse theories about the nature of global politics in the post-Cold War period . Huntington's theory is based on the theories of the Cold War era .
 Some theorists and writers argued that human rights, liberal democracyand capitalist free market economy had become the only remaining ideological alternative for nations in the post-Cold War world . Human rights and liberal democracy are the only ideological alternatives for nations .
 Francis Fukuyamaargued that the world had reached the 'end of history' in a Hegelian sense . He argued that the end of history had reached a point in Hegelianist terms .
 Huntington believed that while the age of ideology had ended, the world had only reverted to a normal state of affairs characterized by cultural conflict . Huntington believed the age had ended and that cultural conflict had returned to normal .
 In his thesis, he argued that the primary axis of conflict in the future will be along cultural and religious lines . In the future, he said, conflict will be based on religious and cultural lines .
 The concept of different civilizations, as the highest rank of cultural identity, will become increasingly useful in analyzing the potential for conflict, he says . As an extension, he posits that the concept will be increasingly useful to analyze potential conflict .
 It is my hypothesis that the fundamental source of conflict in this new world will not be ideological or primarily economic . It is not only ideological or economic, it is also economic. It is a question of whether conflict will be ideological, or economic .
 The great divisions among humankind and the dominating source of conflict will be cultural . The great division among humankind is cultural rather than physical, he says .
 Nation states will remain the most powerful actors in world affairs . But the principal conflicts of global politics will occur between nations and groups of different civilizations . Nations will remain most powerful, but conflict will occur with groups of civilizations, says historian .
 "The fault lines between civilizations will be the battle lines of the future," says President Obama . The fault lines are the fault lines of civilizations, says Obama .
 This is not to advocate the desirability of conflicts between civilizations . It's not to say whether or not it's OK to engage in conflict with civilizations .
 It is to set forth descriptive hypothesis as to what the future may be like. The future is to be described as what it is like .
 Westemcivilization, comprising North America, Western Europe, Australia and Oceania, is based in West Africa and Australia . It includes North America and Western Europe .
 Whether Latin America and the former Soviet Union are included, or are instead their own separate civilizations, will be an important future consideration for those regions, Huntington says .
 Includes Central America, South America, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, and Mexico . Includes Central American, South American and Dominican Republic .
 May be considered a part of Western civilization, though it has slightly distinct social and political structures from Europe and Northern America . May also be considered part of Europe and North America .
 Many people of the Southern Cone regard themselves as full members of the Western civilization . Many people in the South consider themselves as Westerners .
 The Orthodox World of the former Soviet Union, Armenia, Georgia, the former Yugoslavia, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Greece, Ukraine and Romania . The Orthodox world includes former Soviet republics, former Yugoslavia and former Yugoslavia .
 The Eastern world is the mix of the Buddhist, Chinese, Hindu, and Japonic civilizations . Buddhism, Hinduism, Buddhism, Buddhism and J.S. are ancient texts .
 This group also includes the Chinese diaspora, especially in relation to Southeast Asia . This group is also known as the Chinese community of Chinese immigrants .
 The Muslim world of the Greater Middle East, northern West Africa, is part of the Muslim world . Albania, Bangladesh, Brunei, Comoros, Indonesia, Malaysia, Pakistan, and Maldives are Muslim countries .
 Sub-Saharan Africa is located in Southern Africa, Middle Africa, East Africa, and South Africa . Cape Verde, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Liberia, Liberia and Sierra Leone are sub-Saharan African .
 Ethiopia and Haiti are labeled as ""Lone"" countries . Instead of belonging to one of the ""major"" civilizations, they are labeled "Lone" countries . Ethiopia is labeled as a single country .
 Huntington writes that Israel could be considered a unique state with its own civilization, but one which is extremely similar to the West . Huntington: Israel's civilization is similar to that of the West, but not unique to Israel .
 Huntington believes that the Anglophone Caribbean, former British colonies in the Caribbean, constitutes a distinct entity . Huntington also believes that former British colony of the Caribbean constitutes a separate entity .
 There are also others which are considered ""cleft countries" because they contain large groups of people identifying with separate civilizations . Others are also known as "cleft nations"
 Examples include India, Ukraine, France, France , Benin, Chad, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Togo, Guyana and Suriname .
 Sudan was included as ""cleft"" between Islam and Sub-Saharan Africa . This division became a formal split in July 2011 following an overwhelming vote for independence by South Sudan in a January' 2011 referendum .
 Russia, Japan, and India are what Huntington terms 'swing civilizations' and may favor either side . Huntington's thesis of civilizational clash is based on his theory of 'swing civilization'
 Huntington says Russia cooperates with Iran to avoid further Muslim-Orthodox violence in Southern Russia . Russia, for example, clashes with the many Muslim ethnic groups on its southern border, but also helps Iran to help continue the flow of oil .
 Huntington argues that a ""Sino-Islamic coqnection"" is emecging in which China will cooperate more closely with Iran, Pakistan, and other states to augment its international position . Huntington argues .
 Huntington also argues that civilizational conflicts are particularly prevalent between Muslims and non-Muslims . Huntington identifies the ""bloody borders" between Islamic and . non-Islamic civilizations .
 This conflict dates back as far as the initial thrust of Islam into Europe, its expulsion in the Iberian reconquest, the attacks of the Ottoman Turkson Eastern Europe and Vienna, and the European imperial division of the Islamic nations in the 1800s and 1900s .
 Universal, ""all-or-nothing"" religions, in the sense that it is believed by both sides that only their faith is the correct one 3. Universal, "all- or-nothing" religions, such as Christianity, Islam and Christianity .
 Teleologicalreligions say their values and beliefs represent the goals of existence and purpose in human existence . Teleological Religions are a belief that the purpose of their religion is to be fulfilled .
 Irreligious people who violate the base principles of those religions are perceived to be furthering their own pointless aims, which leads to violent interactions . People who violate principles of religions are seen as furthering pointless aims .
 The Islamic Resurgenceand demographic explosion in Islam, coupled with the values of Western universalism, infuriate Islamic fundamentalists . Huntington: The view that all civilizations should adopt Western values infurates Islamic fundamentalist .
 Huntington wrote about the clash between Islamic and Western civilizations in his 1996 book . Huntington: The clash would lead to a bloody clash between the two civilizations . All these historical and modem factors combined, Huntington wrote, he wrote briefly in his Foreign Affairsarticle .
 The political party Hizb ut-Tahrir also reiterate Huntington's viev/s in their published book .
 Fault line conflicts are on a local level and occur between adjacent states belonging to different civilizations or within states that are home to populations from different civilizations . Fault line conflict occurs between states that belong to different cultures or states that have different populations .
 Core state conflicts are on a global level between the major states of different civilizations . Core state states are engaged in core state conflicts on the global level .
 Core state conflicts can arise out of fault line conflicts when core states become involved . Core states can become involved in fault line conflict when they become involved with each other . Core state states can also be involved in the conflict between their core states .
 Critics of Huntington's ideas extend their criticisms to traditional cultures who wish to modernize without adopting the values and attitudes of Westemculture. Modernization, westernization, and ""torn countries""
 Critics sometimes claim that to modernize is necessarily to become Westernized to a very large extent . These critics say that modernizing means that Westernization is necessary to be Westernized .
 Those who consider the Clash of Civilizations thesis accurate often point to the example of Japan, claiming that it is not Western state at its core .
 They argue that it adopted much Western technology, parliamentary democracy, and free enterprise . But it has remained culturally very distinct from the West .
 Many point out the East Asian Tigers or neighboring states as having adapted western economics, while maintaining traditional or authoritarian social government . Many also point out that they have adapted western . economics, but maintain traditional . social government.
 The variant of this argument that uses Russia as an example relies on the acceptance of a unique non-Westem civilization headed by an Orthodox state such as Russia or perhaps an Eastern European country .
 Huntington argues that Russia is primarily a non-Westem state . But he seems to agree that it shares a considerable amount of cultural ancestry with the modem West . Huntington: Russia shares a lot of cultural heritage with the West .
 Russia was one of the great powers during World War I . It also happened to be a non-Westem power . Russia was the only non-westem power in the world .
 According to Huntington, the West is distinguished from Orthodox Christian countries by the experience of the Renaissance, Reformation, the Enlightenment, overseas colonialism and overseas colonialism . The West has a recent reinfusion of Classicalculture through Rome rather than through the continuous trajectory of the Byzantine Empire .
 This issue is also linked to the ""universalizing factor" exhibited in some civilizations . This issue may also be linked to some civilizations' universalizing factor .
 Turkey's political leadership has systematically tried to Westernize the country since the 192os, is his chief example . Turkey is one of the countries that has been trying to westernize since the early 2000s .
 Turkey's elite imposed western institutions and dress, embraced the Latin alphabet, joined NATO, and is seeking to join the European Union . Turkey's history, culture, and traditions are derived from Islamic civilization, but Turkey's .
 He also gives the example of Australia as a country between its Western civilizational heritage and its growing economic engagement with Asia .
 According to Huntington, a tom country must meet three requirements to redefine its civilizational identity . Huntington: A tom country needs to meet three criteria: meet three goals: redefine identity .
 Third, elites of the civilization that the country is trying to join must accept the country . Third, the country's elites must accept that they must accept it .
 To date no tom country has successfully redefined its civilizational identity, this mostly due to the elites of the 'host' civilization refusing to accept the tom country . If Turkey gained membership of the European Union it has been noted that many of its people would support Westernization .
 If this were to happen it would be the first to redefine its civilizational identity . The U.S. has a history of changing its name and identity .
 Amartya Sen to the fact that diversity is a feature of most cultures in the world . Amartiya Sen to Huntington: "Diversity IS a feature in most cultures"
 The practice of democracy that has won out in the modem West is largely a result of a consensus that emerged since the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution, and particularly in the last century .
 Berman says distinct cultural boundaries do not exist in the present day . Berman: "Distinct cultural boundaries are not present today" Berman: The world's oldest culture is still alive and well alive .
 He argues there is no ""Islamic civilization"" nor a ""Western civilization" He argues that the evidence for a civilization clash is not convincing .
 Islamic extremists spent a significant amount of time living and/or studying in the Western world, he says . In addition, he cites the fact that many Islamic extremists spend significant amounts of time in Western world .
 Conflict arises because of philosophical beliefs various groups share, Berman says . Conflict arises due to philosophical beliefs, regardless of cultural or religious identity, he says . Berman: Conflict is based on philosophical beliefs .
 Said argues that Huntington's categorization of the world's fixed ""civilizations"" omits the dynamic interdependency and interaction of culture . Said argues this categorization omits a dynamic inter-dependency of culture and culture .
 As early as the 1970s, scholars such as Abu Zahra argued that Islam vastly varies contextually and historically .
 Sections from the Koran that assert equality for men and women have been pointed out and warnings have been issued regarding the verj' significant gaps that may exist .
 Islam is an issue for debate and action in the context of the politics of nation states, the stmggle for energy supplies, superpower rivalry, and dependency dependency . Fundamental questions such as what Islam means for Muslims themselves in the modem world are equally important to Muslims themselves .
 Huntington's prediction that Turkey might follow some sort of imperial past becomes less plausible by the day . Muslim countries such as Indonesia and Tunisia hardly fit into Huntington's fierce Weltanschauung . Even newly elected ""Islamic"" Turkish conservative leaders turn towards Brussels, and not Tashk
 The theory of Dialogue Among Civilizations is a response to Huntington s Clash of Civilizations . It has become the center of some international attention in recent years . Dialogue among Civilizations has become an international focus .
 The Alliance of Civilizations initiative was proposed at the 59th General Assembly of the United Nations in 2005 by the President of the Spanish Government, Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero and co-sponsored by the Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan . The concept was introduced by former Iranian president Mohammad K
 The initiative is intended to galvanize collective action across diverse societies to combat extremism . It aims to overcome cultural and social barriers between mainly the Western and predominantly Muslim worlds .
 Huntington's geopolitical model, especially the structures for North Africa and Eurasia, is largely derived from the ""Intermediate Region"" geopolitical model . The Intermediate Region was first formulated by Dimitii Kitsikis and published in 1978 .
 Intermediate Region spans the Adriatic Sea and the Indus River . The region is neither western nor eastern but is considered distinct .
 Huntington departs from Kitsikis contending that a civilizational fault line exists between the two dominant yet differing religions, hence a dynamic of external conflict . Huntington argues that the region is at risk of internal conflict between Christianity and Islam .
 Kitsikis establishes an integrated civilization with those belonging to the less dominant religions of Shiite Islam, Alevism, Judaism and Judaism . Kitsiki established a civilization with Shiite Islam and Alevistism, but the other religions were not dominant .
 They have mutual cultural, social, economic and political views and norms which radically differ from those in the West and the Far East . They have a set of mutual cultural . social, social and political . views and . norms .
 In the Intermediate Region, therefore, one cannot speak of a civiliational clash or external conflict, but rather an internal conflict, not for cultural domination, but for political succession . The Intermediate Region is in the middle of a political struggle for the future of the region's future .
 This has been successfully demonstrated by documenting the rise of Christianity from the hellenized Roman Empire . The rise of the Islamic caliphates from the Islamic Caliphates and the Christianized Roman empire .
 Diplomacy is the art and practice of cohducting negotiations between representatives of groups or states . Diplomacy involves the art of co-hosting negotiations .
 Diplomacy is the conduct of international relations through the intercession of professional diplomats . Diplomacy usually refers to issues of peace-making, trade, war, economics, culture, environment and human rights .
 International treaties are usually negotiated by diplomats prior to endorsement by national politicians . Diplomats usually negotiate by diplomats before endorsement of national governments . International treaty negotiations are usually concluded by diplomats .
 Diplomacy is the employment of tact to gain strategic advantage or to find mutually acceptable solutions to a common challenge . One set of tools is being the phrasing of statements in a non-confrontational, or polite manner .
 Sun Tzu was a 6th century BC military strategist and author of The Art of War . He was one of the earliest realists in international relations theory . He is considered a realist in the world of international relations .
 He lived during a time in which rival states were starting to pay less attention to traditional respects of tutelage to the Zhou Dynasty figurehead monarchs .
 The idealized role of the ""persuader/diplomat" developed in the early 1800s . Diplomacy was used to establish allies, bartering land, and signing peace treaties .
 The Han Dynasty was forced to uphold a marriage alliance and pay an exorbitant tribute to the powerful northern nomadic Xiongnu that had been consolidated by Modu Shanyu . From the Battle of Baideng to the Battle Mayi, the Han Dynasty fought the Xion
 The treaty was renewed no less than nine times, but did not restrain some Xiongnu tuqi from raiding Han borders . It was renewed nine times but not stopped some tuqi raiding Han .
 Koreans and Japanese during the Chinese Tang Dynasty looked to the Chinese capital of Chang'an as the hub of civilization . They emulated its central bureaucracy as the model of governance .
 After several conflicts with the Tibetan Empire spanning several different decades, the Tang finally made a truce and sigied a peace treaty with them in 841 . The Tang made a treaty with the Tibet Empire in the middle of 841.
 In the 11th century during the Song Dynasty, there were cunning ambassadors such as Shen Kuo and Su Song . They achieved diplomatic success with the Liao Dynasty, the often hostile Khitan neighbor .
 Both diplomats secured the rightful borders of the Song Dynasty through knowledge of cartography and dredging up old court archives .
 Song and Ly made a peace agreement in 1082 to exchange the respective lands they had captured from each other during the war . Song was defeated by the Ly Dynasty of Vietnam from 1075 to 1077 . Song made an agreement with Ly to exchange their respective lands captured during war .
 The Chinese embassy mission of Zhou Daguan to the Khmer Empire of Cambodia in the 13th century was the first of its kind . Another 95 notable events in Chinese diplomacy were the Chinese embassy missions to Cambodia from 13th to 14th century .
 Chinese diplomacy was a necessity in the distinctive period of Chinese exploration . Chinese diplomacy is a necessity for the development of the region .
 Since the Tang Dynasty, the Chinese became heavily invested in sending diplomatic envoys abroad on maritime missions into the Indian Ocean . The Chinese also sent envoys to India, Persia, Arabia, East Africa and Egypt .
 Chinese maritime activity increased dramatically during the Song Dynasty . New nautical technologies, many more private ship owners, and many more economic investors in overseas ventures .
 During the Mongol Empire the Mongols created something similar to today's diplomatic passport called paiza . The passport was created during the Mongolian Empire during the reign of the Mongol empire .
 The paiza were in three diflerent types depending on the envoy's level of importance . They were used to provide food and water for the envoy .
 With the paiza, there came authority that an envoy can ask for food, transport, place to stay from any city, village, or clan within the empire with no difficulties . The paiza was used to provide food and transport to the envoy from any of the empire .
 From the 17th century the Qing Dynasty concluded a series of treaties with Czarist Russia, beginning with the Treaty of Nerchinsk in the year 1689 . The treaty was made in 1689, and the treaty was signed by the Qing dynasty of China .
 This was followed up by the Aigun Treaty and the Convention of Peking in the mid-19th century . The Aigun treaty and the Peking Treaty were followed up in the early 1900s .
 As European power spread around the world in the 18th and 19th centuries so too did its diplomatic model . Asian countries adopted European diplomatic systems as a result of European power .
 Ancient India, with its kingdoms and dynasties, had a long tradition of diplomacy . Ancient India was one of the world's most powerful states .
 Arthashastra is a complete work on the art of kingship, with long chapters on taxation and on the raising and maintenance of armies . The work includes chapters on taxes and raising armies .
 It also incorporates a theory of diplomacy, of how in a situation of mutually contesting kingdoms, the wise king build alliances and tries to checkmate his adversaries .
 Diplomatic relations within the Early Modem era of Asia were depicted as an environment of prestige and Status. Asia was depicted as a society of status and status . Modern Asia is depicted as the birthplace of the world's most powerful nations .
 It was maintained that one must be of noble ancestr>' in order to represent an autonomous state within the international arena . It is maintained that . One must be . of noble ancestry>'
 The position of diplomat was often revered as an element of the elitist class within Asia . Therefore the position of a diplomat was revered as a member of the elite .
 It is this practice that has been employed since the conception of the first city-states within the international spectrum . The practice has been used in the world since the early days of the world's first cities .
 Diplomats in Asia were originally sent only for the purpose of negotiation . Diplomats were sent to Asia in order to help negotiate with the government .
 They would be required to immediately return after their task was completed . They would have to return after they had completed .
 The majority of diplomats initially constituted the relatives of the ruling family . Diplomats initially formed the majority of the diplomats .
 A high rank was bestowed upon them in order to present a sense of legitimacy with regards to their presence . They were given a high rank by the government to present them with a high status .
 Diplomacy evolved to become a cmcial element of international relations within the Mediterranean and Asia . Italy, the Ottoman Empire, and China were the first real states that perpetuated environments of diplomacy .
 The ability to practice diplomacy is one of the defining elements of a state, diplomacy has been practiced since the inception of civilization . Diplomacy is practiced in ancient times, and diplomacy is a key component of statecraft .
 In Europe, diplomacy begins with the first city-states formed in ancient Greece . Diplomacy begins with ancient Greek city-state cities .
 Diplomats were sent only for specific negotiations, and would return immediately after their mission concluded . Diplomats would return to the country only after their missions concluded .
 Diplomats were usually relatives of the ruling family or of very high rank in order to give them legitimacy when they sought to negotiate with the other state . Diplomats would be relatives of ruling families or of high rank to give legitimacy when negotiating .
 The origins of diplomacy are in the strategic and competitive exchange of impressive gifts, which may be traced to the Bronze Age . This may be recognized as an aspect of Homeric guest-friendship .
 Ancient Greece did not have diplomatic representatives regularly posted in each other's territory . The Greek City States on some occasions sent envoys to each other in order to negotiate specific issues, such as war and peace .
 Some of the functions given to modem diplomatic representatives were filled by a proxenos, who was a citizen of the host city having a particular relations of fnhip with another city a relationship often hereditary in a particular family .
 In Europe, early modem diplomacy's origins are often traced to the states of Northern Italy in the early Renaissance . The first embassies were established in the 13th century in Italy .
 Tuscany and Venice were also flourishing centres of diplomacy from the 14th century onwards . Venice was a flourishing centre of diplomacy in the early 15th century .
 It was in the Italian Peninsula that many of the traditions of modem diplomacy began, such as presentation of an ambassador's credentials to the head of state .
 Milan was the first to send a representative to the court of France in 1455 . Milan was also the first city to send an official to the French court .
 Milan refused to host French representatives fearing espionage and that they would intervene in its internal affairs . Milan refused the invitation fearing that the French representatives would intervene with the Italian government .
 As foreign powers such as France and Spain became increasingly involved in Italian politics, the need to accept emissaries was recognized . The emissary role was recognized as a result of foreign involvement .
 Spain appointed an ambassador to the Court of England in 1487 . Spain was the first to send a permanent representative to the court .
 The rules of modem diplomacy were further developed during the modem era . During that period, modem diplomacy was further developed .
 At that time an ambassador was a nobleman, the rank of the noble assigned varying with the prestige of the country he was delegated to . The rank of an ambassador in the 16th century was assigned to an ambassador .
 Strict standards developed for ambassadors, requiring they have large residences, host lavish parties, and play an important role in the court life of their host nation .
 In Rome, the most prized posting for a Catholic ambassador, the French and Spanish representatives would have a retinue of up to a hundred . The French, Spanish and Italian ambassadors would have up to 100 people in Rome .
 Smaller states would send and receive envoys, who v/ere a rung below ambassador . Smaller countries would send envoys to smaller countries .
 Somewhere between the two was the position of minister plenipotentiary . The position was also known as the minister of minister of ministerial plenentotentiary.
 The ambassadors from each state were ranked by complex levels of precedence that were much disputed . The ambassador's rank was based on a complex system of precedence .
 States were normally ranked by the title of the sovereign . For Catholic nations the emissary from the Vatican was paramount, then those from the kingdoms, and duchies and principalities .
 Determining precedence between two kingdoms depended on a number of factors that often fluctuated, leading to near-constant squabbling . The king's precedence was determined by factors such as precedence .
 Ambassadors, nobles with little foreign experience and no expectation of a career m diplomacy, needed to be supported by large embassy staff . Ambassadors needed to have large embassies in order to be able to serve their country .
 These professionals would be sent on longer assignments and would be far more knowledgeable than the higherranldng officials about the host country . They would be more knowledgeable about the hosts .
 Embassy staff would include a wide range of employees, including some dedicated to espionage . Some of the staff would be dedicated to spying .
 The need for skilled individuals to staff embassies was met by the graduates of universities . This led to an increase in the study of international law, modem languages, and history at universities throughout Europe .
 Permanent foreign ministries began to be established in almost all European states to coordinate embassies and staffs . At the same time, permanent foreign ministries were established in most European states .
 These ministries are still far from their modem form, and many of them had extraneous internal responsibilities . These ministries were still far away from the modem form .
 Britain had two departments with frequently overlapping powers until 1782 . They were also far smaller than they are currently .
 The elements of modem diplomacy slowly spread to Eastern Europe and Russia, arriving by the early 18th century . France, which boasted the largest foreign affairs department, had only some 70 full-time employees in the 1780s . France had the largest diplomatic department, which had just 70 full
 The revolution would see commoners take over the diplomacy of the French state, and of those . that were .::or;‘;aered by revolutionary armies .
 Congress of Vienna of 1815 established international system of diplomatic rank . After the fall of Napoleon, the system was established in 1815 . The Congress established the system of international diplomatic ranks .
 Disputes on precedence among Ho-uons pcrsisiwu for over a century until after World War 11, when the rank of ambassador became the 98 _ International Relations norm .
 In between that time, figures such as the German Chancellor Otto von Bismark were renowned for international diplomacy . He was renowned for his international diplomacy during the Second World War .
 Pharaoh of Egypt and ruler of the Hittite Empire created one of the first known international peace treaties in 1274 BC during the Nineteenth dynasty .
 Relations with the government of the Ottoman Empire were particularly important to Italian states . The relationship between Italian states and the government was particularly important .
 The maritime republics of Genoa and Venice depended less and less upon their nautical capabilities, and more and more upon the perpetuation of good relations with the Ottomans . Venice's prosperity depended less on nautical capability than its nautical ability .
 Interactions betw'een various merchants, diplomats, and religious men between the Italian and Ottoman empires helped inaugurate and create new forms of diplomacy and statecraft .
 Diplomat is a diplomat who represents an autonomous state in all aspects of political affairs . Diplomat was originally a negotiator, but has evolved into a persona that represents an independent state . Diplomats are now more likely to be involved in international affairs than diplomats .
 It became evident that all other sovereigns felt the need to accommodate themselves diplomatically, due to the emergence of the powerful political environment of the Ottoman Empire . The Ottoman Empire became the most powerful state in the world .
 The atmosphere of diplomacy within the early modem period revolved around a foundation of confomiity to Ottoman culture . One could come to the conclusion that diplomacy in the early modal period revolve around the basis of confomity .
 Diplomatic agreements can sometimes be reached among liberal democratic nations by appealing to higher principles . Most real world diplomacy has traditionally been heavily influenced by hard power .
 The interaction of strength and diplomacy can be illustrated by a comparison to labor negotiations . The interaction is illustrated by the comparison of labor negotiations with labor negotiations in the U.S.
 If a labw union is not willing to strike, then the union will not go anywhere, union says . Management has no incentive to agree to union demands, says union leader .
 If management is not willing to take a strike, then the company will be walked all over by the labor union . Management will be forced to agree to any demand the union makes . If management does not take a walk, the union will walk all over .
 There are incentives in diplomacy to act reasonably, especially if the support of other actors is needed . Diplomats are also incentivised to act fairly, especially when they are in need of support .
 The gain from winning one negotiation can be much less than the increased hostility from other parts of the country . The gain is much less if the gain from one negotiation is less than that of the other .
 When for instance two World Trade Organization countries have trade disputes, it is in the interest of both to limit the spill over damage to other areas by following some agreed-upon rules . When two countries have a trade dispute, it's in the interests of both of them .
 There have been a number of cases where 99 diplomats have been killed . This is normally viewed as a great breach of honour . However, this is not the case of 99 diplomats being killed .
 Genghis Khan and the Mongols were well known for strongly insisting on the rights of diplomats . The Mongols would often wreak horrific vengeance against any state that violated these rights .
 Diplomatic rights established in the mid-17th century in Europe and have spread throughout the world . Diplomatic relations were established in Europe in the 17th century and spread throughout Europe . Diplomacy rights have been established in many countries since then .
 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations protects diplomats from being persecuted or prosecuted while on a diplomatic mission . These rights were formalized by the 1961 Vienna Convention . Diplomats are protected from persecution or prosecution while on diplomatic missions .
 Diplomatic communications are also viewed as sacrosanct, and diplomats have long been allowed to carry documents across borders without being searched . Diplomats are also seen as having to be searched for documents .
 In times of hostility, diplomats are often drawn for reasons of personal safety . Diplomats are drawn for personal safety, as well as in some cases when the host country is friendly .
 Ambassadors and other diplomats are sometimes recalled temporarily by their home countries as a way to express displeasure with the ho.st country . Ambassadors or other diplomats can be recalled as a result of a disagreement .
 In both cases, lower-level employees still remain to actually do the business of diplomacy .
 Diplomats of Persia and other states were seen as a guarantee of good behavior in the Ottoman Empire . Diplomats were a guarantee for good behavior when diplomats of Persia were seen .
 If a nation broke a treaty or if their nationals misbehaved, diplomats would be punished . Diplomats would also be punished for breaking a treaty, breaking the law .
 Diplo'mats were used as an enforcement mechanism on treaties and international law . Diplosats were thus used as a means of enforcing international treaties and law enforcement .
 To ensure that punishing a diplomat mattered, rulers insisted on high-ranking figures . To ensure punishment mattered rulers insisted that punishing diplomats mattered .
 Diplomats as a guarantee were also employed sometimes in pre-modem Europe and other parts of Asia . Diplomats were also used as guarantee agents in Europe and Asia in the 1980s .
 Diplomacy is closely linked to espionage or gathering of intelligence . Diplomacy and espionage is closely associated with intelligence gathering or espionage .
 Embassies are bases for both diplomats and spies, and some diplomats are essentially openly acknowledged spies . Embassies can be used as embassies or embassies .
 The job of military attaches includes learning as much as possible about the military of the nation to which they are assigned . For instance, the job of a military attacher is to learn about the nation's military .
 They do not tiy^ to hide this role and, as such, are only invited to events allowed by their hosts, such as militaiy parades or air shows .
 These individuals are given fake positions at the embassy, but their main task is to illegally gather intelligence . They coordinate spy nngs of locals or other spies, usually by coordinating spy nings .
 For the most part, spies operating out of embassies gather little intelligen‘'c themselves . Their identities tend to be known by the opposition .
 If discovered, tliei* diplomats can be expelled from an embassy, but for the most part counter-intellige.i ' agencies prefer to keep these agents in situ and under close monitoring .
 The information gathered by spies plays an increasingly important role in diplomacy . Spies are increasingly important in the world's diplomacy .
 Arms-control treaties would be impossible without the power of International Relations iOO i cconnaissance satellites and agents to monitor compliance . International relations iOOi c connaissance satellites would monitor compliance with treaties .
 Information gleaned from espionage is useful in almost all forms of diplomacy, such as trade agreements and e-order disputes . The U.S. has been accused of espionage in the past for espionage .
 Various processes and procedures have evolved over time for dealing with ijplomatic issues and disputes . Oiplomatic resolution of problems has evolved over the years . Processes and procedures are used to resolve disputes and disagreements .
 Nations sometimes resort to international arbitration when faced with a specific question or point of contention in need of resolution . Arbitration and mediations are often used to resolve issues such as disputes in the world .
 For most of history, there were no official or formal procedures for such proceedings . For most, there have been no formal procedures .
 They are generally accepted to abide by general principles and protocols related to international law and justice . They were generally accepted by law and order .
 A commission of diplomats might be convened to hear all sides of an issue, and to come some sort of ruling based on international law . In such cases, diplomats might decide what to do .
 In the modem era, much of this work was carried out by the International 'curt of Justice at the Hague, or other formal commissions, agencies and tribunals, under the United Nations .
 Hay-Herbert Treaty Enacted after the U.S. and Britain submitted a dispute to international mediation about the US-Canadian border . Hay-Shebert Treaty was enacted after the United States and Britain submit a dispute .
 Sometimes resolutions were sought through the convening of international conferences . Conferences were held in the 1930s and '60s .
 In such cases, there are fewer ground mies, and fewer formal applications of international law . In such situations, there will be fewer ground-mies and fewer applications of law .
 Participants are expected to guide themselves through principles of international fairness, logic, and protocol . However, participants will be guided by international fairness and logic . Participants will be able to make decisions based on international rules .
 The Congress of Berlin was a meeting of the European Great Powers' and the Ottoman Empire's leading statesmen in Berlin in 1878 . This included the shape of the map of Europe, the disposition of political and nationalist claims of various ethnic groups and nationalities wishing to have some political autonomy
 In the wake of the Russo-Turkish War, 1877-78, the aim was to reorganize conditions in the Balkans . Sometimes nations convene official negotiation processes to settle an issue .
 These are similar to the conierences mentioned above, as there are technically no established rules or procedures . There are also no established procedures to deal with the situation .
 There are general principles and precedents which help define a course for such iiroceedings . However, there is a general principle which helps define the course of the next generation .
 After weeks of negotiation, agreement was reached and the accords were signed . Later leading directly to ths Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty of 1979, 2.2 .
 Treaty of Portsmouth Enacted after President Theodore Roosevelt brought together delegates from Russia and Japan, to settle the Russo-Japanese War . Treaty was signed by President Roosevelt in 1903 .
 Roosevelt's personal intervention settled the conflict, and caused him to win the Nobel peace prize . Roosevelt's intervention helped settle the conflict . Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1945 .
 Diplomatic recognition is an important factor in determining whether a nation is an independent state . Diplomatic recognisability is a key factor in deciding whether an independent nation is independent .
 Receiving recognition is often difficult, even for countries which are fully sovereign . Receiving recognised is difficult even for fully sovereign countries .
 Even many of the closest allies of the Dutch Republic refused to grant it full recognition . For many decades after becoming independent, even many of its closest allies refused to accept full recognition.
 Today there are a number of independent entities without widespread diplomatic recognition, most notably the Republic of China on Taiwan .
 Since the 1970s, most nations have stopped officially recognizing the ROC's existence on Taiwan, at the insistence of the People’s Republic of China . Most nations have since stopped recognizing the existence of the POC on Taiwan .
 Currently, the U.S. and other nations maintain informal relations through de facto embassies, with names such as the American Institute in Taiwan .
 Taiwan's de facto embassies abroad are known by names such as the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office .
 The United States maintained official diplomatic ties with the ROC until 1979, when relations were broken off as a condition for establishing official relations with Communist China . This was not always the case, with the U.S. maintaining official diplomatic relations with ROC .
 Palestinian representatives in most Western countries are not accorded diplomatic immunity . Their missions are referred to as Delegations General . The Palestinian National Authority has its own diplomatic service .
 Other unrecognized regions which claim independence include Abkhazia, Transnistria, Somaliland, South Ossetia, Nagomo Karabakh, and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus .
 Lacking the economic and political importance of Taiwan, these nations tend to be much more diplomatically isolated . These nations are often more isolated than Taiwan .
 Informal diplomacy has been used for centuries to communicate between powers . Informal diplomatic tools have been used in the past to communicate with world leaders .
 Most diplomats work to recruit figures in other nations who might be able to give informal access to a country’s leadership . Most diplomats are often recruited by people who might have informal access .
 In some situations, such as between the United States and the People's Republic of China, a large amount of diplomacy is done through semi-formal channels . Academic members of thinktanks such as academic members of the U.S.-China relationship are used in some cases .
 This occurs in situations where governments wish to express intentions or to suggest methods of resolving a diplomatic situation, but not a formal position . This is when governments want to express their intentions, but do not wish to .
 Track n diplomacy is a specific kind of informal diplomacy, in which nonofficials engage in dialogue, with the aim of conflict resolution, or confidence-building .
 On some occasion a former holder of an official position carries out informal diplomatic activity after retirement .
 In some cases, governments welcome such activity as a means of establishing contact with a hostile state of group without being formally committed .
 In some cases, informal diplomats seek to promote a political agenda different from that of the government . In other cases, however, such informal diplomats promote a different political agenda .
 Paradiplomacy refers to international relations conducted by subnational, regional, local or non-central governments . It refers to the international relations carried out by subnations, regions, countries, countries .
 The most ordinary case of paradiplomatic relation refer to co-operation between bordering political entities . The most common case of this type of relationship is that of a bordering political entity .
 Federal states, provinces, regions etc. may extend over to different regions or to issues gathering local governments in multilateral for a worldwide . However, interest of federal states, . provinces, . regions etc., may . extend over . different regions .
 Non-central governments may be allowed to negotiate and enter into agreement with foreign central states . Some non-central states may be able to enter into agreements with foreign states .
 It alludes to a new way of making diplomacy by involving new non governmental and non professional actors in the making of diplomacy .
 In the frame of globalization, culture plays a major role in the definition of identity . Culture plays a big role in defining identity and in the relations between people, author says .
 Joseph Nye points out the importance of having a soft power besides a hard power . Nye says the U.S. needs to be able to use soft power in the future .
 When classical diplomacy fails, a better knowledge can help bridging the gap between cultures . A better knowledge of different cultures can help bridge the gap in diplomacy .
 Cultural diplomacy becomes a subject of academic studies based on historical essays on the U.S., Europe, and the Cold War . Cultural diplomacy is a major topic in academic studies on the United States and Europe .
 Small state diplomacy is receiving increasing attention in diplomatic studies and international relations . Small states are becoming more involved in diplomacy in the modern world .
 Small states are particularly affected by developments which are determined beyond their borders . Climate change, water security and shifts in the global economy are key issues for small states . Small states will be affected by climate change and economic shifts in global economy .
 Diplomacy is the main vehicle by which small states are able to ensure that their goals are addressed in the global arena . Diplomacy can help small states achieve their goals in a global arena, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Small states have strong incentives to support international cooperation . Small states are small enough to have strong incentive to cooperate with international cooperation. Small states also have incentives to join international cooperation, say experts .
 Conducting effective diplomacy poses unique challenges for small states . Small states have resources at their disposal, but with lirritritrit resources at disposal .
 Archangel Gabriel, the Deliverer of the Word of God, is a communicator and emissary par excellence . He is the Patron Saint of Diplomacy Archangel Gabriel . Gabriel is also known as the Deliverrer of God .
 He brings good news and his prophecies of love unveil secrets and reveal the hidden truth . He also unveils the secrets of love .
 He connects not only the Divine with the Human, but also three monotheistic religions, as he is one of the figures respected by Judaism, Christianity and Islam .
 He appears both in Old and New Testaments, as well as in the Qur'an, in each case as God's courier . He is believed to have been God's messenger .
 Globalization, as a concept, refers to the ""shrinking"" of the world as a whole . Globalization refers both to the increased consciousness and the increased consistency of the world .
 It is a term used to describe the changes in societies and the world economy that are the result of dramatically increased cros.sborder trade, investment, and cultural exchange . The term is used in the context of increased trade and investment in the world .
 The processes and actions to which, the concept of globalization now refers have been proceeding, with some interruptions, for many centuries, but only in relatively recent times has globalization become a main focus of discussion . globalization is a process and process that has been proceeding for centuries .
 The current or recently-past ^och of globalization has been dominated by the nation-state, national economies, and national cultural identities . The nation state has dominated the nation's economic and cultural identity, says the author .
 globalization is often used in characterizing processes underway in the areas of financial markets, production, and investment . In specifically economic contexts, globalization is used to characterize processes underway .
 Between 1910 and 1950, a series of political and economic upheavals dramatically reduced the volume and importance of international trade flows . The world's most significant trade flows were from 1910 to 1950 .
 In the post-World War n environment, fostered by international economic institutions and rebuilding programs, international trade and investment dramatically expanded . In the aftermath of the war, the U.S. has seen a surge in investment in the Middle East .
 By the i970s, the effects of the flow of trade and investment became increasingly visible, both in terms of the benefits and the disruptive effects . The i970i970s are the latest in a series of high-tech devices that have been released by Apple .
 globalization processes are strongly affected by the values and motivation of the people involved in the process . As v/ith all human endeavors, globalization processes will be affected by people's values, motivation and values .
 In theory, globalization should benefit all people because it can produce greater overall economic value . But in theory, it can also be beneficial to all people in the world . Globalization should be beneficial for all, but not all, according to experts .
 Achieving an equitable distribution of the added value would require the people who dominate the market to embody the virtue of sacrificing themselves to serve the higher purpose of the good of all .
 For many people, globalization is feared and resisted as a negative . The legacy of colonialism causes a lingering arrogance among the powers in the Group of Eight and creates suspicion in the developing world .
 Corporatist culture is seen as trampling upon local values and local economies . Corporatism is seen to be trampling on local values, local economies.
 The Western, secular value system of the major economic actors is seen as a neo-colonial affront to people with non-Westem religious and cultural values . Western values are seen as an 'neo-colonial affront' to non-Westerners .
 Resistance to globalization is growing in many places, manifesting in the early twenty-first century with rise of Islamic terrorism . Thus, resistance to globalization has been growing in some places, with the rise of ISIS terrorism .
 To be successful, the leaders of the globalization process need to practice the virtues of resfect for religious and cultural values . Leaders must sacrifice their economic selfinterest for the benefit of people suffering poverty and want .
 The resolution requires world leaders to pay heed to the religious and cultural dimensions of life . It is a challenge v/ho.se .
 ""Globalization" carries multiple rneanings, nuances, and applications . Aspects of Globalization carries multiple applications, such as the Internet .
 The formation of a global village through closer contact between different parts of the world, with increasing possibilities pf personal exchange, mutual understanding, and friendship between ""world citizens,"" and "world citizens"
 The United Nations has coined the term “Our Global Neighborhood” to descnbe an emerging world-political context . The U.N. says the term is used to refer to the region's emerging world political context .
 Globalization Theory aims to understand complex connectivity proliferating at the global level considering both its sources and its implications across the vanous spheres of social existence . The theory is based on the theory of global connectivity .
 In political science and international relations, the current unit of analysis is the nation state . The current unit is the country state, the most important unit in analysis as the nation .
 Globalization has brought forth supranational organizations and international regimes, that is, commonly accepted laws and commonly accepted practices . Globalization is a form of globalization that brings together suprised organizations and regimes .
 The loss of sovereignty by the nation state to transnational and supranational organizations is of greatest concern, says President Obama . "The nation state is losing sovereignty," says Obama .
 A world system perspective is a world with a common political system, linked by a common language, cultural practices, and institutions . The World System perspective is based on a world of nations with a shared political system . A world of political systems is linked by common language and cultural practices .
 In sociology and communications, globalization is understood as global mass culture dominated by the modem means of cultural production . Global mass culture is understood to be dominated by modem cultural production, says sociologist .
 Mass communication produces images that cross and re-cross linguistic fi-ontiers more rapidly and easily than goods and services . Mass communication speaks across languages in an immediate way. Mass communication is a form of language that can speak across languages .
 Global mass culture is dominated by the ways in which the visual and graphic arts have entered directly into the reconstitution of popular life, of entertainment, and of leisure with the image, imagery, and styles of mass advertising .
 This process is homogenizing but also enormously absorptive of techniques and practices . The process is "homogenizing" but also "absorbing" techniques and "compelling" practices .
 Economic globalization refers to free trade and increasing relations among members of an industry in different parts of the world . With a corresponding erosion of national sovereignty in the economic sphere, it also erodes national sovereignty .
 The negative effects of for-profit multinational corporations are exerted through such actions as the use of substantial and sophisticated legal and financial means to circumvent the bounds of local laws and standards . Corporations leverage the labor and services of unequally-developed regions against each other .
 Globalization shares a number of characteristics with internationalization and is used interchangeably . Some prefer to emphasize the erosion of the nation-staie or national boundaries .
 Globalism, if the concept is reduced to its economic aspects, can be said to contrast v'ith economic nationalism and protectionism . Globalism can be seen as a contrast to economic nationalism, protectionism, says David Cameron .
 Globalization is a history of increasing trade between nations based on stable institutions that allow individuals and organizations in different nations to exchange goods wnf . itnimal friction . Globalization has both technical and political meanings .
 The term ""liberalization"" came to mean the combination of laissez-faire economic theory with the removal of barriers to the movement of goods . The term "liberalization" was coined in the 1930s and 1940s .
 This led to the increasing specialization of nations in exports, and the pressure to end protective tariffs' and other barriers to trade . This has led to increased pressure for the end of trade barriers .
 The first important era to mention here is the time of the Roman and Han empires . The Han and Roman empires were ruled by the Roman Empire .
 The consolidation of large imperial states pacified enough of Eurasia that trading networks could safely link the extreme ends of the landmass . Trade networks were safely linked between the two regions of the world .
 Nomadic peoples played an especially prominent role in the economy of the silk roads, since they consumed the finished products of settled lands and transported them to other customers . Nomadic people played a significant part in the silk road economy .
 Si’k roads facilitated the exchange of trade goods and communication of cultural and religious traditions throughout much of the Eastern Hemisphere . So long as the si'k roads remained active, they facilitated trade and cultural exchange .
 This era came to an end with the collapse of the Roman and Han empires, which had anchored and sustained much of the interregional commerce in goods and ideas . The outbreak of devastating epidemic diseases disrupted societies and economies throughout Eurasia .
 Beginning about the sixth century, a revival of long-distance trade underwrote a second round of intense cross-cultural encounters . The first time the two cultures met in the Middle Ages was in the form of trade .
 T'e revival of crosscultural dealings depended again on the foundation of large imperial states, such as the Tang, Abbasid, and Carolingian empires, which pacified vast stretches of Eur. Europe .
 Long-distance trade in the sixth centum/ benefited also fron more frequent use of sea lanes across the Indian Ocean .
 M »chants once again link d the International Relation s Eurasian landmass, while impressive numbers of missionaries and pilgrims traveled in their company .
 Literacy and religions of salvation extended their influence to most parts of Eurasia . In an era often labeled a dark age—quite inappropriately—literacy was a key feature of the era .
 Mongols conquered most of Eurasia, the most populous and culturally and technologically advanced continent, by the thirteenth century . The development of a consciousness of the world as a whole first came with the conquest of most of the continent by the Mongols .
 For the first time in history, a single regime presided over the entire length of the overland trade routes linking China and the Near East . The first and only time this has been recorded in China's history, it was ruled by the Chinese regime .
 This made it possible for merchants and goods to move safely over vast distances, facilitating the transmissions of ideas and techniques . This enabled the transmission of ideas, techniques and ideas .
 Since China was substantially ahead of both Islam and the West in the general level of its technology, this flow chiefly benefited the lands at the western ends of the trade routes and beyond .
 It brought awareness to Europeans of the civilizations of East Asia and a stronger desire to reach them by going around the Islamic world that had so long stood in between .
 Navy technology enabled the European voyages of discovery of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries . That, in turn, brought forth the effort to improve naval technology which enabled the discovery .
 Instead of being the first, this can be called the second state on the v/ay to globalization— first Eurasia, then the world . So, instead of being first, it can rightfully be called a second state of globalization .
 The pacified vast regions that facilitated overland travel throughout the empire made it possible for humans and their animal stock to transport microorganisms across long distances much more efficiently .
 Longdistance trade probably did not disappear completely, but its volume certainly declined precipitously during the late fourteenth century . The volume of longdistance trade in Europe declined sharply .
 Based on the Pax Britannica and the exchange of goods in currencies in currencies pegged to specie, this era grew along with industrialization . This era grew as a result of industrialization and the rise of the dollar .
 The theoretical basis was Ricardo’s work on comparative advantage and Say's Law of General Equilibrium . Say's law was based on Ricardo's theory of comparative advantage . The theory of general equilibrium is based on general equilibrium .
 In essence, it was argued that nations would trade effectively, and that any temporary disruptions in supply or demand would correct themselves automatically .
 The institution of the gold standard came in steps in major industrialized nations between 1850 and 1880 . Exactly exactly when various nations were truly on a gold standard is a great deal of contentious debate .
 Other bilateral trade agreements, including sections of Europe's Maastricht Treaty and North American Free Trade Agreement, have also been signed .
 Although globalization has touched almost every person and locale in today's world, the trend has spread unevenly . Signs of globalization have not been seen in the U.S.
 It is most concentrated among propertied and professional classes, in the North, in towns and among younger generations .
 Globalization has prompted important changes to certain attributes of capital, the state, the nation, and modem rationality . But, globalization has prompted significant changes to some attributes of the state and nation .
 Contemporary globalization has had some positive consequences with respect to cultural regeneration, communications, decentralization of power, economic efficiency, and the range of available products . It has also had some important positive consequences .
 State government policies toward globalization have had many negative consequences in regard to increased ecological degradation, persistent poverty, worsened working conditions, cultural violence, widened arbitrary inequalities, and deepened democratic deficits .
 These include greater international movement of commodities, money, information, and people; and the development of technology, organizations, legal systems, and infrastructures to allow this movement .
 Increase in international trade at a faster rate than the growth in the world economy 2.2.5% . 2.3% of the world's economic growth is due to the increase in international trading .
 Increase in international flow of capital including foreign direct investment 3.5 per cent . Increase in foreign investment 3 per cent. Increase in investment in China .
 Greater trans-border data flow, using such techmologies as the Internet, communication satellites, and telephones 5.5.5, will be able to communicate with each other .
 Greater international cultural exchange, for example through the export of Hollywood and Bollywood movies 7.5 per cent of the world’s population .
 Spreading of multiculturalism and increased individual access to cultural diversity, with on the other hand, reduction in diversity through assimilation, hybridization . Spreading multiculturalism means increased access to the individual .
 Erosion of national sovereignty and national borders through international agreements leading to organizations like the WTO, OPEC, and EU 10. 10. The WTO is leading an organization like OPEC, OPEC and the EU .
 Increase in the share of the world economy controlled by multinational corporations 15.5% in 2013 . Increase in share of share of world economy .
 Increased role of international organizations such as WTO, UN, IMF that deal with international transactions 16.5% of global transactions .
 Economic integration is concerned with the removal of trade barriers or impediments between at least two participating nations and the establishment of cooperation and coordination between them . Increase in the number of standards applied globally .
 Globalization refers to the growing economic interdependencies of countries worldwide through the increasing volume and variety of cross-border transactions in goods and services and of international capital Hows . The rapid and widespread diffusion of technology and information is a key part of global economic growth .
 Member nations remove all trade impediments among themselves but retain their freedom concerning their policy making vis-a-vis non-member countries . Involves country combination, where the member nations remove . All trade impediment among themselves .
 Similar to a free trade area except member nations must conduct and pursue common external commercial relations such as common tariff policies on imports from non-member nations .
 The Central American Common Market and the Caribbean Community and Common Market are examples of this form . The Caribbean Common Market is an example of this type of market .
 A customs union that allows free trade of products and services but also free mobility of production factors (capital, labor, technology, technology) across national member borders . A particular customs union allows not only free trade but free mobility across national borders .
 A common market involving the unification of monetary and fiscal policies. A particular common market . A common common market in the world involving monetary and economic policies.
 The participating nations will become literally one nation in both an economic and political sense . Requires the participating nations to become one nation . Requires participation in the process of becoming a nation .
 This union involves the establishment of a common parliament and other political institutions . The union is based on a common political institution .
 From 1 to 5, the degree of economic integration increases . Along with the above sequence from 1-5, the level of integration in the EU is increased .
 One form may shift to another over time if all the participating nations agree . If all the nations agree, the form of the event may shift .
 For example, the European Union started as a common market and shifted over the years to an economic union and now to a partially political union . The European Union has shifted from a common economic union to a partly political union.
 The above formgjeflects economic integration between or among nations within a region . It forms forms of economic integration .
 Global economic integration also occurs through “multilateral cooperation” in which participating nations are bound by rules, principles, or responsibilities stipulated in commonly agreed upon agreements . Multilateral cooperation is a form of global economic integration that occurs through cooperation .
 Multilateral agreements are largely used to promote worldwide economic exchanges . Unlike the preceding five forms that all lead to regional economic integration, multilateral agreements lead to global economic integration .
 Various aspects of globalization are seen as harmful by public-interest activists as well as strong state nationalists . Anti-globalization is considered harmful by many in the U.S. and abroad .
 Activists themselves have said that this name is as meaningless as saying the aim of the movement is to globalize justice . Noam Chomsky has said that noam Chomsky, for example, has said this is meaningless .
 Fair trade theorists claim that unrestricted free trade benefits those with more financial leverage at the expense of the poor . Critics claim that institutions involved in the system of globalization have not taken the interests of poorer nations and the working class into account .
 Many anti-globalization activists see globalization as the promotion of a corporatist agenda . Activists say globalization is intent on constricting the freedoms of individuals in the name of profit .
 They claim that increasing autonomy and strength of corporate entities increasingly shapes the political policy of nation-states . They also claim that the strength of corporations increasingly shapes nation-state policy .
 Some anti-globalization groups argue that globalization is necessarily imperialistic . Some argue that it is one of the driving reasons behind the Iraq War .
 Some argue that globalization imposes credit-based economics, resulting in unsustainable growth of debt and debt crises . Others argue that the debt crisis is a result of credit-driven economic growth .
 Another more conservative camp in opposition to globalization are state-centric nationalists that fear globalization is displacing the role of nations in global politics . They point to NGOs as impeding the power of individual nations .
 Some advocates of this warrant for anti-globaiization are Pat Buchanan in the U.S. and Jean-Marie Le Pen in France . Pat Buchanan is a strong supporter of the anti-globalization movement .
 The main opposition is to unfettered globalization (neolibcrai; laissez-faire capitalism), guided by governments and what are claimed to be quasi-rjovernments (such as the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank) that are supposedly not held
 The anti-global movement is very broad, including church groups, national liberation factioift, left-wing parties, environmentalists, peasant unionists, anti-racism groups, libertarian socialists, and others .
 Many have decried the lack of unity and direction in the movement, but some, such as Noam Chomsky, have claimed that this lack of centralization may be a strength .
 Protests by the global justice movement have now forced high-level international meetings away from the major cities where they used to be held, and off into remote locations .
 Some anti-globalization activists object to the fact that the current ""globalization"" globalizes money and corporations and at the same time refuses to globalize people and unions . Some activists say the current "globalization" globalizes people and corporations .
 This can be seen in the strict immigration controls that exist in nearly all countries . The lack of labor tights in many countries in the developing world is also seen in many .
 Supporters of democratic globalization can be labeled pro-globalists . Pro-gtobalization is a form of democracy in the United States .
 The second phase of globalization, which was market-oriented, should be completed by a phase of building global political institutions representing the will of world citizens, the authors say .
 The difference with other globalists is that they do not define in advance any ideology to orientate this will, which should be left to the free choice of those citizens via a democratic process . The difference is that globalists are not defining an ideology in advance .
 Supporters' of free trade point out that economic theories of comparative advantage suggest that free trade leads to a more efficient allocation of resources . All countries involved in the trade benefit from the trade, they say .
 In general, they claim that this leads to lower prices, more employment, higher output, and greater consumption opportunities .
 Libertarians and other proponents of laissez-faire capitalism say higher deg^es of political and economic freedom in the form of democracy and market economies produce higher levels of material wealth .
 They see globalization as the beneficial spread of democracy and market mechanisms . They say globalization is beneficial to spread democracy and economic prosperity .
 Critics of the anti-globalization movement argue that it is not elected and as such does not necessarily represent or is not held accountable to a broad spectrum of people . Critics say it does not represent or hold accountable to broad spectrum .
 Anti-globalization movement uses anecdotal evidence to suppprt its view while worldwide statistics strongly support globalization instead . Also, anti-globalisation movement uses anecdotes to support its view .
 The percentage of people in developing countries living below $1 per day has halved in only 20 years . Life expectancy has almost doubled in the developing world since WWn and is starting to close the gap with the developed world . Child mortality has decreased in every developing region of the world;
 Many pro-market are also critical of the World Bank and IMF, arguing that they are corrupt bureaucracies controlled and financed by states, not corporations . The IMF and World Bank are also criticized by pro-markets advocates .
 Critics point out that many loans have been given to dictators who never carried out reforms . Instead they left the common people to pay the debts later, they say .
 Such corrupted loan partners cause ""moral hazard"" or hidden detrimental action by the lenders . Such corrupted loans partners cause 'moral hazard' or 'hidden detrimental action' by lenders .
 Pro-capitalists see here an example of too little use of markets, not too much . The pro-capitalist see here as a example of a failure to use markets too much, not enough .
 Some of the resistance to globalization comes from special interest groups with conflicting interests like Western world unions, they say . They also note that some of the . resistance comes from . special interest . groups with . conflicting interests .
 The principle policy concern of globalization is usually put in terms of issues of economic efficiency . Globalization in question is economic efficiency, according to the OECD .
 Economists tend to judge globalization largely in terms of the gains or losses that it brings to the productive development of scarce world resources . Economists often see globalization as a boon to world's scarce resources .
 Economic growth should always be secondary to, and in service of, security, justice, and democracy, says many . However, many would argue that economic growth should be in service to security and justice . The U.S. has been in the midst of a global recession since 2008 .
 In some respects, globalization has promoted increased human security, with disincentives to war, improved means of humanitarian relief, new job creation opportunities, and greater cultural pluralism . Globalization has disincentivied war, disincentived humanitarian relief and increased job creation, and more cultural
 Globalization has perpetuated or deepened warfare, environmental degradation, poverty, unemployment, exploitation of workers, and social disintegration . However, in other ways, it has also perpetuated warfare, poverty and unemployment, says author .
 Globalization does not automatically increase or decrease human security, experts say . Globalization doesn't automatically increase security, they say, but it does increase human security .
 The bright side of globalization has in certain cases improved possibilities for young people, poor countries, women, and other subordinate social circles, writes CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: Globalization has helped young people realize their potential .
 globalization has thus far sustained o’"" increased various arbitrary hierarchies in contempoiarj' society . Morci negatively, however, has negatively affected globalization, according to Morci .
 There is much academic discussion m ■ i wnether globalization is a real phenomenon or only a mjdh . There is also discussion of whether globalization is real or not a phenomenon .
 Tj put it simply, the role of the state and the importance of nations are great-, ■; cmationalization, while globalization in its complete form eliminates nation stau hiese authors see that the frontiers of countries far from being dissolved .
 The world increasingly shares problems and challenges that do not obey nationstate borders . The world is increasingly sharing problems that don't obey nationstates borders, most notably pollution .
 The movement previously known as the anti-globalization movement has transmogrified into a movement of movements for globalization from below . As such, the movement seeks social organization that transcend the nation state and representative democracy .
 The emergence of a global movement is indisputable and therefore one can speak of a real process towards a global human society of societies . So, whereas the original arguments of anti-global critique can be refuted with stories of internationalization .
 Non-Aligned Movement is a group of states considering themselves not aligned formally with or against any major power bloc . Non-aligned states consider themselves not aligning formally with the likes of Russia and China .
 Non-Aligned Tlcvement members can be described as all of those countries which belong to the Group of 77 . They are not Oceanian and are not part of the Non-aligned Movement .
 The organization was founded in Belgrade in 1961 . It was largely the brainchild of Yugoslavia's President Josip Broz Tito, India's first Prime Minister, jawaharlal Nehru, Egypt's second President, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Ghana's first president Kwame
 All five leaders were prominent advocates of a middle course for states in the Developing World between the Western and Eastern blocs in the Cold War in the 1950s .
 They represent nearly twothirds of the United Nation's members and 55% of the world population . They include countries considered to be developing or part of the Third World .
 Brazil has never been a formal member of the NonAligned Movement . Brazil shares many of the aims of the movement, but often sends observers to summits . Brazil has also sent observers to many of non-Aligned movement's summits in recent years .
 Many of the Non-Aligned Movement's members were actually quite closely aligned with one or another of the super powers . The movement still maintained surprising amounts of cohesion throughout the Cold War .
 Some members of the group were involved in serious conflicts with other members . Some of the members have been involved in conflicts with others .
 The movement fractured from its own internal contradictions when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan in 1979 . The movement was fractured from internal contradictions .
 Soviet allies supported the invasion, but other members of the movement condemned it . The Soviet allies were divided over the invasion .
 The Non-Aligned Movement was formed as an attempt to thwart the Cold War . It has struggled to find relevance since it was formed in the 1950s . It was formed to thwart a Cold War, but has struggled since then .
 Yugoslavia was suspended or expelled Ifom the Movement . Yugoslavia was expelled from the Movement at the summit of the Summit of the Movement in Jakarta, Indonesia, at the end of the 1960s .
 The successor states of the SFR Yugoslavia have expressed little interest in membership . Some of the successor states have observer status status .
 Malta and Cyprus ceased to be members of the European Union in 2004 . In 2004, the two countries joined the EU and Malta joined the continent .
 Turkmenistan, Belarus and the Dominican Republic are the most recent entrants to the world's most populous countries . The Dominican Republic is the most recently entered .
 The Non-Aligned movement was never established as a formal organization, but became the name to refer to the participants of the Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-aligned Countries first held in 1961 . It was the first conference of heads of state or government of non-
 Nehru used the phrase in a 1954 speech in Colombo, Sri Lanka . Menon's friend, Jawaharlal Nehru, used it in a 1952 speech .
 Nehru described the five pillars to be used as a guide for SinoIndian relations, which were first put forth by Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai . Nehru: The five pillars were put forward by Zhou En-lai, who was the Chinese premier .
 The principles would later serve as the basis of the Non-Aligned Movement . Called Panchsheel, these principles later served as the foundation of the non-aligned movement . The Non-alignment Movement was formed in the 1950s .
 A significant milestone in the development of the Non-Aligned Movement was the 1955 Bandung Conference . Indonesian president Sukarno gave a significant contribution to promote this movement .
 The attending nations declared their desire not to become involved in the Cold War . They adopted a ""declaration on promotion of world peace and cooperation"", which included Nehru's five principles .
 Six years after Bandung, the first Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries was held in September 1961 in Belgrade . Tito's initiative led to the first conference of heads of state or government of non-aligned countries .
 The term non aligned movement appears first in the fifth conference in 1976, where participating countries are denoted as members of the movement . The term "non aligned movement" first appeared in 1976 .
 At the Lusaka Conference in September 1970, member nations added as aims of the movement the peaceful resolution of disputes and abstention from big power military alliances and pacts .
 Another aim was opposition to stationing of military bases in foreism countries . Another added aim was opposing stationing military bases on foreist countries .
 Sukarno of Indonesia, Jawaharlal Nehru of Nehru o ' ndia, and Josip Broz Tito of Yugoslavia, Gamal Abdul Nasser of Egyjrt and Kwame bfioumah of Ghana . Gamal Abdel Nasser
 The movement stems from a desire not to be aligned within a geopolitical/military structure . The movement does not have a very strict organizational structure .
 The chairmanship of the chairmanship rotates between countries and changes at every summit of heads of state or government to the country organizing the summit .
 The United Nations' Charter of Human Rights is based on the principles of human rights and the purposes of the purposes and principles of the Charter .
 Recognition of the equality of all races and of all nations, large and small . Recognition .
 Abstention from intervention or interference in the internal affairs of another country . The U.S. should not intervene in the country's internal affairs .
 Respect for the right of each nation to defend itself singly or collectively, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations, is a key part of the U.N. Charter .
 Refraining from acts or threats of aggression or the use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any country . Refraining against acts of aggression .
 Settlement of all international disputes by peaceful means, in conformity with the Charter of the United Nations . Settlement of international disputes is a peaceful means .
 Secretaries General of the NAM included Suharto, an authoritarian anti-communist, and Nelson Mandela, a democratic socialist and famous anti-apartheid activist .
 Non-Aligned Movement is unified by its commitment to world peace and security . Consisting of many governments with vastly different ideologies, it is unified . Consists of many countries with vastly differing ideologies .
 NAM's commitment to peace pre-dates its formal institutionalisation in 1961 . NAM is committed to peace in peace, but it has never been formally institutionalised .
 The Brioni meeting between heads of governments of India, Egypt and Yugoslavia in 1956 recognized that there exists a vital link between struggle for peace and endeavours for disarmament .
 The Non-Aligned Movement espouses policies and practices of cooperation, especially those that provide mutual benefit to all those involved . The Non Aligned Movement is based in the United States .
 African concerns about apartheid were linked with Arab-Asian concerns about Palestine . Success of multilateral cooperation in these areas has been a stamp of moderate success .
 The Non-Aligned Movement has played a major role in various ideological conflicts throughout its existence, including extreme opposition to apartheid regimes and support of liberal movements in Zimbabwe and South Africa .
 The NonAligned Movement has become a voice of support for issues facing developing nations and is still contains ideals that are legitimate within this context, Role after the Cold War .
 A major question has been whether many of the country's foundational ideologies can be applied to contemporary issues, such as national independence, territorial integrity, and the struggle against colonialism and imperialism .
 The movement has emphasised its principles of multilateralism, equality, and mutual nonaggression . It is an instrument that can be utilised to promote the needs of member nations at the international level .
 In its efforts to advance Southern interests, the movement has stressed the importance of cooperation and unity amongst member states . But cohesion remains a problem since the size of the organisation and the divergence of agendas and allegiances present the ongoing potential for fragmentation .
 While agreement on basic principles has been smooth, taking definitive action vis-a-vis particular’ international issues has been rare .
 The movement continues to see a role for itself, as in its view, the world’s poorest nations remain exploited and marginalised . It is Western hegemony and neo-colonialism that the movement has really re-aligned itself against .
 It opposes foreign occupation, interference in internal affairs, and aggressive unilateral measures . It has also shifted to focus on socio-economic challenges facing member states, especially the inequalities manifested by globalisation .
 The Non-Aligned Movement has identified economic underdevelopment, poverty, and social injustices as growing threats to peace and security . Economic underdevelopment and poverty have been identified as a growing threat to peace . The non-aligned Movement is based in the United States .
 In recent years the organization has criticized United States foreign policy . Current activities and positions include criticism of U.S. foreign policy and criticism of the United States .
 The U.S. invasion of Iraq and the War on Terrorism, its attempts to stifle Iran and North Korea's nuclear plans, and other actions have been denounced as human rights violations and attempts to run roughshod over smaller nations .
 The movement’s leaders have also criticized the American control over the U.N. and other international structures .
 Since 1961, the group have supported the discussion of the case of Puerto Rico's self-determination before the U.N. Puerto Rico .
 A resolution on the matter will be proposed on the XV Summit by the Hostosian National Independence Movement . A resolution is expected to be proposed at the summit of Hostosians .
 Since 1973, the group have supported the discussion of the case of Western Sahara's self-determination before the United Nations .
 Non-Aligned Movement has been outspoken in its criticism of UN structures and power dynamics . The organisation has been utilised by powerful states in ways that violate the movement’s principles .
 It has made a number of recommendations that would strengthen the representation and power of ‘non-aligned’ states .
 The proposed reforms are aimed at improving the transparency and democracy of UN decision-making . The reforms are also aimed at making the UN more transparent .
 The UN Security Council is the element considered the most distorted, undemocratic, and in need of reshaping . The UN is considered to be one of the world's most distorted elements of the body .
 Lately the Non-Aligned Movement has collaborated with other organisations of the developing world, primarily the Group of 77, to form a number of joint committees and releasing statements .
 This dialogue and cooperation can be taken as an effort to increase the global awareness about the organisation and bolster its political clout . This dialogue can also be taken to increase global awareness of the organisation .
 The movement accepts the universality of human rights and social justice, but fiercely resists cultural homogenisation .
 The organisation appeals for the protection of cultural diversity, and the tolerance of religious, socio-cultural, and historical particularities that define human rights .
 U.N. High-Level Working Group for the Restructuring of the United Nations 2.2.3 . High-level working group for the restructuring of the UN 2.3.5.4.5 .
 It may be applied to any situation where previously hostile nations not involved in an open war deescalate tensions through diplomacy and confidence building measures .
 The Cold War thawing of the Cold War occurred from the late 1950s until the Soviet Invasion of Afghanistan in late December, 1979 . However, it is primarily used in reference to the general reduction in tension between the Soviet Union and the United States .
 NATO powers and the Warsaw Pact had pressing reasons to seek relaxation in tensions . The two sides in the Cold War, NATO and Warsaw Pact, both wanted to relax tensions .
 Leonid Brezhnev and the rest of the Soviet leadership felt that the economic burden of the nuclear arms race was unsustainable . The economic burden was unsustainable, according to the Soviet leader .
 The Vietnam War drained government finances at the same time as Lyndon Johnson's Great Society sought to expand the government welfare state . The U.S. economy was also in financial trouble during the Vietnam War . Vietnam War was also draining government finances as a result of the war .
 In Europe, the Ostpolitik of Willy Brandt was decreasing tensions . The Soviets opcd that with Detente, more trade with Western Europe to bolster their sagging economy would be possible .
 Soviet thinkers also felt that a less aggressive policy could potentially detach the Western Europeans from their American ally . Soviet thinkers felt that less aggressive policies could detach them from the U.S.
 Worsening relations with the People's Republic of China, leading to the SinoSoviet Split, had caused great concern in the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union had great concern over relations with China, which led to the split .
 China's leadership feared the potential of a Sino-American alliance against them . They believed it necessary to improve relations with the United States .
 Improved relations with China had already thawed the general American view of Communism . The U.S. had already improved relations with the Chinese government .
 There was also the realization that the ""relative gains"" theory as to the predictable consequences of war might no longer be appropriate . The 'relative gains' theory no longer appropriate .
 Brezhnev and Nixon hoped improved relations would boost domestic popularity and secure their power . The two leaders hoped to boost their domestic popularity with improved relations . The Soviet Union brokered relations with the United States in 1968 .
 The most obvious manifestation of Detente was the series of summits held between the leaders of the two superpowers and the treaties that resulted from these meetings . The treaties resulted from the summits .
 The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and Outer Space Treaty were two of the first building blocks of Ddtente . Later in the decade, the Nuclear non-proliferation . Treaty was also a key building block of the treaty . Treaty signed in 1950s .
 These early treaties did little to curb the superpowers' abilities, and served primarily to limit the nuclear ambitions of third parties that could endanger both superpowers . However, these early treaties were largely aimed at limiting third parties .
 The most important treaties were not developed until the advent of the Nixon Administration, which came into office in 1969 . The treaties were developed in the Nixon administration .
 Talks began towards actual limits in the nuclear capabilities of the two superpowers . The West agreed and talks began towards limits in nuclear capabilities .
 SALT I is the common name for the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty Agreement . It is also known as the SALT-I Treaty Agreement, but also known known as Strategic ArmsLimitation Treaty .
 SALT I froze the number of strategic ballistic missile launchers at the then existing levels, and provided for the addition of new submarine-launched ballistic missiles launchers only after the . same number of older intercontinental ballistic missile and SLBM launchers had been dismantled .
 The strategic nuclear forces niche of the Soviet Union and the United States were changing in character in 1968 . In 1968, the U.S. and Soviet Union were in the strategic nuclear niche .
 One clause of the treaty required both countries to limit the sites protected by an antiballistic missile system to one . The treaty also required that both countries limit the site protected by a missile system .
 The Soviet Union had deployed such a system around Moscow in 1966 . The U.S. announced an ABM program to protect twelve ICBM sites in 1967 .
 A modified two-tier Moscow ABM system is still used, probably with missile interceptors equipped with conventional instead of nuclear warheads . The system is believed to have been used in the 1980s .
 The United States built only one ABM site to protect a Minuteman base in North Dakota where the ""Safeguard Program"" was deployed . The U.S. only built one of the sites .
 Due to the system's expense and limited effectiveness, the Pentagon disbanded ""Safeguard"" in 1975 .
 Negotiations lasted from November 17, 1969 until May 1972 in a series of meetings beginning in Helsinki . United States delegation headed by Gerard C Smith, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency .
 First results of SALT I came in May 1971, when an agreement was reached over ABM systems . After a long deadlock, the first results came after a long period of negotiations .
 A number of agreed statements were also made which helped to initiate the period of detente between the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 In the same year that SALT I was signed, the Biological Weapons Convention and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty were also concluded . SALT was signed in 1995 .
 SALT II SALT n was a second round of talks from 1972 to 1979 between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . The talks sought to curtail the manufacture of strategic nuclear weapons .
 SALT n was the first nuclear arms .treaty which assumed real reductions in strategic forces to 2250 of all categories of delivery vehicles . Both sides agreed to reduce their strategic forces .
 SALT n helped the U.S. discourage the Soviets not to arm their third generation ICBMs of SS-17, SS-19 and SS-18 types with much more MIRVs . SALT helped the United States to discourage the Soviet Union from arming their third
 The USSR's missile design bureaus had developed in the late 1970s experimental versions of these missiles equipped with anywhere from 10 to 38 thermonuclear warheads each . These missiles were equipped with up to 38 warheads .
 Soviets secretly agreed to reduce Tu22M production to thirty aircraft per year and not to give them an intercontinental range . The Soviets also agreed to cut production of the aircraft to thirty planes per year .
 It was particularly important for the U.S. to limit Soviet efforts in the INF forces rearmament area . The United States was particularly concerned about limiting Soviet efforts to the area .
 The SALT n Treaty banned new missile programs . Both sides were forced to limit their new strategic missile types development . U.S. preserved most essential programs like Trident and cruise missiles .
 An agreement to limit strategic launchers was reached in Vienna on June 18, 1979 . Leonid Brezhnev and President of the United States Jimmy Carter signed the agreement .
 Six months after the signing, the Soviet Union deployed troops to Afghanistan, and in September of the same year some senators like unexpectedly discovered the so-called ""Soviet brigade"" on Cuba .
 The Reagan Administration withdrew from SALT 11 in 1986 after accusing the Soviets of violating the pact . Its terms were, nonetheless, honored by both sides until 1986 .
 Subsequent discussions took place under the and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty . The treaty was ratified in 1998 .
 The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaties refers to two rounds of bilateral talks and corresponding international treaties between the Soviet Union and the United States . The Cold War superpowers discussed armament control on the issue of arms control .
 Negotiations started in Helsinki, Finland, in 1969 and focused on limiting the two countries' stocks of nuclear weapons . The two countries agreed to limit their nuclear arsenals in 1969 .
 START I and START n placed specific caps on each side's number of nuclear weapons . START n had to be capped at 1,000 nuclear weapons each side had to use nuclear arms . START I placed a cap on the number of weapons used by each side .
 Helsinki Accords in 1975, the Conference on Secant}and Cooue;auji'i in Hurope inel arid produced the Helsinld Accords . Apoilo-Sojaiz Test Project became the first international space mission in July of that year
 Thn mission had been preceded by five years of political negotiation and technical cooperation, including exchanges of U.S. and Russian engineers .
 Trade relations between the two blocs increased substantially during the era of detente . Trade relations with China and the West increased substantially .
 Most significant were the vast shipmcnls of grain that were sent from the West to the Soviet Union each year . This helped make up for the failure of Koilchez, Soviet collectivized agriculture . The vast shipcnls were sent to the West each year to
 The Jackson-Vanik amendment was signed into laiv by Gerald Ford on January 3, 1975, after a unanimous voce by both houses of the United States Congress . It was designed to leverage trade relations bebveen the U.S. and the Soviet Union .
 Despite the growing ainicabiiiAs heated cnnipeution contiiiucd between the twepeipowers, especially in the Third World . Continued Contticts are growing .
 Wfers in South Asia in 1971 and the Middle East in 1973 sav/ the superpow'ers back their sides v/ith material and diplomatic support . In 1971 and 1973, the superpowers in both countries fought in support of the West .
 In Latin America the U.S. continued to block any leftv/ard shift in the region v/ith military coups . The United States blocked any left v/ard shifts in Latin America . The U.N. blocked any change in Latin American politics .
 Neither side trusted the other fully and the potential for nuclear war remained . The potential for a nuclear war was still a major question .
 Each side continued to have thousands of intercontinental ballistic missiles pointed at each other’s cities, SLBM submarines in the oceans of the world . Hundreds of nuclear-armed aircraft were deployed, and forces guarding disputed borders in Korea and Europe .
 The espionage war continued unabated as defectors, reconnaissance satellites, and signal interceptions were still a priority for both sides .
 Detente began to unravel in 1979 due to a series of events . Detente was a two-state state of the Cold War .
 /tmerican public believed U.S. had lost its international power and prestige . Revolution and hostage crisis embarrassed U.K.
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan led to a swift denunciatioii by the United States and its Vvestem allies . The 1980 Sununei Olympics, wliich were to be held m Moscow, was cancelled .
 American President jimmy Carter boosted the United States defense budget and began aiding the President of Pakistan General Muha.iiimad Zia-ul-Haq heavily . The U.S. government would subsidize the anti-Soviet Mujahideen fighters in the region .
 The 1980 American presidential election saw Ronald Reagan elected on a platform opposed to the concessions of Detente . Ronald Reagan was elected president of the United States in 1980s .
 Congress of Vienna was a conference of ambassadors of European states . It was held in Vienna from September, 1814 to June, 1815 . Klemens Wenzel von Mettemich chaired the conference .
 The objective of the Congress was to settle the many issues arising from the French Revolutionary Wars, the Napoleonic Wars, and the dissolution of the Holy Roman Empire . The objective was to establish the foundation of the French Revolution .
 This objective resulted in the redrawing of the continent's political map, establishing the boundaries of France, the Netherlands, the states of the Rhine, the German province of Saxony, and various Italian territories . Austria, Britain, France and Russia brokered local and regional problems through
 The Congress of Vienna was the first of a series of international meetings that came to be known as the Concert of Europe . The Concert was an attempt to forge a peaceful balance of power in Europe, and served as a model for later organizations such as the League of Nations and United Nations .
 Napoleonic France's defeat and surrender in May 1814 brought an end to twenty-five years of nearly continuous war . The immediate background was the French defeat of the French Empire in 1814 .
 Negotiations continued despite the outbreak of fighting triggered by Napoleon's return from exile and resumption of power in France .
 The Congress's ""Final Act"" was signed nine days before his final defeat at Waterloo on June 18, 1815 . The Congress signed the act before Waterloo .
 In a technical sense, the ""Congress of Vienna"" was not properly a Congress; it never met in plenary session . Most of the discussions occurred in informal, face-toface, sessions among the Great Powers of Austria, France, Russia, Russia and sometimes Prussia .
 Congress was the first occasion in history where national representatives came together to formulate treaties, instead of relying on messengers and messages between the several capitals . On the other hand, the Congress was also the first time in history that national representatives had come together to form treaties .
 The Four Great Powers had previously formed the core of the Sixth Coalition . Bourbon France and Bourbon France were formed in the 1920s .
 Austria was represented by Prince Mettemich, the Foreign Minister, and by his deputy, Baron Johann von Wessenberg . Austria's Foreign Minister was represented in Vienna .
 Emperor Francis was kept closely informed of the Congress's sessions in Vienna, Austria .
 The United Kingdom was represented by its Foreign Secretary, Viscount Castlereagh; then by the Duke of Wellington; and in the last weeks by the Earl of Clancarty after Wellington left to face Napoleon .
 Count Karl Robert Nesselrode, Tsar Alexander I was also in Vienna and regarded himself as the sole plenipotentiary of Vienna . Count Karl was also a member of the Tsar, who was in Vienna at the time .
 France represented by her foreign minister, Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Perigord . The Duke of Dalberg was the Minister Plenipotentiary of the Duke of Dergberg .
 Talleyrand had already negotiated the Treaty of Paris for Louis XVIII of France . The king, however, distrusted him and was also secretly negotiating with Mettemich, by mail .
 The four other signatories of the Treaty of Paris, 1814, had not been part of the Chaumont agreement, but had joined the treaty of Paris . These parties had been not part of it, but joined the agreement .
 Pedro de Sousa Holstein, Count of Palmella; Antonio de Saldanha da Gama; Joaquim Lobo da Silveira . Pedro de Sousa Holstein was the Portuguese leader of the Portuguese Empire .
 Marquise Agostino Pareto is a Senator of the Republic of Genoa . He was born in Genoa and is a Marquise of the Genoa Marquise .
 The Netherlands Earl of Clancarty, the British Ambassador at the Dutch court, and Baron Hans von Gagem 3. The Netherlands was the Dutch ambassador to the British court .
 A delegation representing German publishers, demanding a copj^ight law and freedom of the press . In addition, there were representatives of cities, corporations, religious organizations and special interest groups .
 TallevTand managed to skillfully insert hirfiself into ""her inner councils"" in the first weeks of negotiations . Initially, representatives of the four victorious powers hoped to exclude the French from participation in the negotiations .
 Talleyrand was able to use this committee to make himself a part of the inner negotiations, he then left this committee, once again abandoning his allies . Once he used this committee he used it to gain access to inner negotiations .
 Talleyrand and the Marquis of Labrador, Spain's representative, were invited on September 30, 1814 . The major Allies' indecision on how to conduct their affairs without provoking a united protest from the lesser powers led to the calling of a preliminary conference .
 Talleyrand protested against the procedure we have adopted and soundly be rated us for two hours . Talleyand protested about the procedure and said it was unfair to be rated .
 The embarrassed representatives of the Allies replied that the document concerning the protocol they had arranged actually meant nothing . They said it was a protocol document that had been arranged .
 Talleyrand's policy, directed as much by national as personal ambitions, demanded the close but by no means amicable relationship he had with Labrador . Labrador, whom he regarded with disdain, was the subject of much of the country's policy .
 The Final Act, embodying all the separate treaties, was signed on June 9, 1815 . Final Act was signed in 1815 and embodies all the treaties signed .
 Russia was given most of the Duchy of Warsaw and was allowed to keep Finland . Russia was also given the most of Poland and most of its territory .
 Pnassia was given two fifths of Saxony, parts of the Duchy of Warsaw, Danzig, and the RhinelandyVvestphalia . Pnasia was also given parts of Poland and parts of Germany .
 The Netherlands and the Southern Netherlands were united in a constitutional monarchy, the United Kingdom of the Netherlands . The House of OrangeNassau provided the king .
 Swedish Pomerania, ceded to Denmark a year earlier, was given to Prussia . Prussia ceded the rest of Sweden to Denmark and Denmark .
 Hanover*gave up the Duchy of Lauenburg to Denmark, but enlarged by the addition of former teiritories of the Bishop of Munster and by the fonnerly Prussian East Frisia, and made a kingdom .
 Most of the territorial gains of Bavaria, Wiirttemberg, Baden, Hesse-Damistadt, and Nassau under the mediatizations of 1801-1806 were recognized . The Mediatizations were made in 1801 .
 Bavaria also gained control of the Rhenish Palatinate and parts of the Napoleonic Duchy of WUrzburg and Grand Duchies of Frankfurt . Bavaria was also given control of parts of Germany and the Rhenderland in the 18th century
 Hesse-Darmstadt, in exchange for giving up the Duchy of Westphalia to Prussia, was granted the city . The city was given to Hesse in return for the city of Darmstadt .
 Austria regained control of the Tirol and Salzburg; of the former Illyrian Provinces; of Tamopoldistrict . Received Lombardy-Venetia in Italy and Dubrovnik in Dalmatia . Austria also gained control of Tirol, Salz
 Former Austrian territory in Southwest Germany remained under the control of Wurttemberg and Baden, and the Austrian Netherlands were also not recovered . The Austrian Netherlands and the former Austrian territory of Austria were also never recovered .
 Habsburg princes were returned to control of the Grand Duchy of Tuscany and the Duchys of Modena . The Grand Ducal duchy was returned to Italy in 1883 .
 The Papal States were under the rule of the pope and restored to their former extent, with the exception of Avignon and the Comtat Venaissin, which remained part of France .
 The United Kingdom was confirmed in control of the Cape Colony in Southern Africa; Tobago; Ceylon; and various other colonies in Africa and Asia . The Cape Colony was confirmed as a British colony .
 Other colonies, most notably the Dutch East Indies and Martinique, were restored to their previous owners . Martinique was restored to its former owners . Other colonies were also restored to previous owners, including Martinique .
 The King of Sardinia was restored in Piedmont, Nice, and Savoy, and given control of Genoa . He was also restored in Nice, Savoy and Savory .
 The Duchies of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla were given to Marie Louise, Napoleon's wife . Marie Louise was the wife of Napoleon Napoleon .
 The Duchy of Lucca was created for the House of Bourbon-Parma, which would have reversionary rights to Parma after the death of Marie Louise . The House of Parma was created in 17th century .
 The most controversial subject at the Congress was the so-called Polish-Saxon Crisis . Freedom of navigation was guaranteed for many rivers, notably the Rhine and the Danube .
 The Russians and Prussians proposed a deal in which much of the Prussian and Austrian shares of the partitions of Poland would go to Russia . The deal would create a Polish Kingdom in personal union with Russia and Alexander as king .
 In compensation, the Prussians would receive all of Saxony, whose King was considered to have forfeited his throne as he had not abandoned Napoleon soon enough . In compensation for the loss of the Saxony the Prussian Empire, they would receive Saxony and all of the rest
 The Austrians, French, and British did not approve of this plan, and signed a secret treaty on January 3, 1815, agreeing to go to war, if necessary, to prevent the RussoPrussian plan from coming to fruition . Talleyrand was inspired by the idea of
 Russia received most of the Napoleonic Duchy of Warsaw as a ""Kingdom of Poland"" called Congress Poland . Russia did not receive the district of Poznan, which was given to Prussia, nor Krakow which became a free city .
 Prussia received 40% of Saxony, with the remainder returned to King Frederick Augustus I Kingdom of . Saxony . The remainder of the kingdom was returned to the Prussia .
 The Congress confirmed France's loss of the territories annexed between 1795-1810 . Prussia acquired Westphalia and the northern Rhineland .
 These states were formed into a loose German Confederation under the leadership of Prussia and Austria . They were formed in the early 1900s .
 By the Treaty of Kiel, Norway had been ceded by the king of Dc.;:nark-Norway to Sweden . Norway was ceded to Sweden by the Swedish king of Sweden .
 Austria gained Lombardy-Venetia in Northern Italy, while much of the rest of NorthCentral Italy went to Habsburg dynasties . The rest of the North of Italy was ruled by Austria and the Ottomalia .
 The Kingdom of Piedmont-Sardinia was restored to its mainland possessions, and also gained control of the Republic of Genoa . The Kingdom was restored in 1883 .
 A large United Kingdom of the Netherlands was created for the Prince of Orange . It includes both the old United Provinces and formerly Austrian-ruled territories in the Southern Netherlands . The United Kingdom was created in 1881 .
 There were other, less important territorial adjustments, including significant territorial gains for the German Kingdoms of Hanover and Bavaria .
 The Duchy of Lauenburg was transferred from Hanover to Denmark . Swedish Pomerania was annexed by Prussia .
 Swiss mercenaries had played a significant role in European Wars for a couple of hundred years . The intention was to put a stop to these activities permanently . Swiss mercenaries were used in several European Wars .
 During the wars, Portugal had lost its town of Olivenqa to Spain and moved to have it restored . Portugal lost the town to Spain during the wars and moved it to be restored .
 Spain accepted the Treaty on May 7, 1817; however, Olivenpa and its surroundings were never returned to Portuguese control and this question remains unresolved . Spain decided to become part of Europe than stand alone .
 The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland received parts of the West Indies at the expense of the Netherlands and Spain . Great Britain kept the former Dutch colonies of Ceylon and the Cape Colony as well as Malta and Heligoland .
 Under the Treaty of Paris, Britain obtained the protectorate over the United States of the Ionian Islands and the Seychelles .
 The Congress of Vienna was frequently criticized by nineteenth-century and more recent historians for ignoring national and liberal impulses, and for imposing a stifling reaction on the Continent . Later criticism of the Congress was often met with criticism for imposing stifling reactions .
 It was an integral part of what became known as the Conservative Order, in which liberties and civil rights associated with the American and French Revolutions were de-emphasized . The Conservative Order was designed to ensure a fair balance of power, peace and stability .
 Henry Kissinger wrote his doctoral dissertation, A World Restored, on it . Henry Kissinger is one of the world's most influential statesmen .
 The main decisions of the Congress were made by the Four Great Powers . Not all the countries of Europe could extend their rights at the Congress . Besides, the main decisions were made .
 Lombard’, Modena, Naples-S icily, Parma, Piedmont-Sardinia, Tuscany, Tusany, Venetia and the Papal States under the control of different powers. Lombard .
 The arrangements made by the Four Great Powers sought to ensure future disputes would be settled in a manner that would avoid the terrible wars of the previous twenty years .
 Congress of Vienna preserved balance of power in Europe, but it did not check the spread of revolutionary movements across the continent some 30 years later . Congress was held in Vienna, Austria, Austria and Germany .
 Disarmament is the act of reducing, limiting, or abolishing weapons . Disarmaments is the term used to reduce, limit, or abolish weapons . It is also called disarmament .
 Disarmament generally refers to a country's military's military or specific type of weaponry . Disarmment is a form of disarmament that has been banned in the past . The term "disarmament" has been used to refer to a type of weapon .
 Disarmament is often taken to mean total elimination of weapons of mass destruction, such as nuclear arms . Disarmment is often thought to mean the elimination of nuclear arms such as the use of nuclear weapons .
 A distinction can also be made beuveen disarmament as a process, and disarmaments as an end state . A distinction should be made between disarmament and an end-state .
 Philosophically, disarmarnent may be viewed as a fosui of demilitarization . It is part of an economic, political, technical, and military process to reduce and eliminate weapons systems .
 The disarmarnent may be part of a set of other strategics, like economic conversion, which aim to reduce the power of 'var making institutions and associated constituencies .
 The program to be presented to this assembly for general and complete disaraiament under effective international conboi rrioves to bridge the gap between those who insist on gradual approach and those who talk only of the final and total achievement .
 It would create machinery to keep the peace as it destroys the machinery of war . It would also create machinery that would destroy the machinery that war destroys .
 It would proceed through balanced and safeguarded stages designed to give no state a military advantage over another . No state would have an advantage over any other state, the government says .
 "It would place the final responsibility for verification and control where it belongs, not with the big powers alone," he says . "Not with one's adversary or one's self, but in an international organization," he adds .
 It would assure that . iridispensabie condition of disarmament tnie inspection and . apply it in stages proportionate to the stage of . disarmament . It would also apply in stages . proportionate . to the stages . of the disarmament stage .
 It would ultimately halt their production as well as the testing, their transfer and their possession . It would also halt the production of the players, testing, and their transfer .
 It would achieve under the eyes of an international disarmament organization, a steady reduction in lorce, both nuclear ana conventional, until it has abolished ail anmes and all weapons except tnose needed for internal order and a new United Nations Force .
 It is no longer to be a goal without means of achieving it, without . means of verifying its progress . Without means of keeping the peace, it must be achieved and verified . It must also be achieved to keep the peace .
 It is now a realistic plan, and a test a test of those only willing to talk and not act . It is a test for those willing to act, and it will test the willingness to talk . It's now a test, and the plan is now now a real test,
 Proponents of nuclear disarmament say that it would lessen the probability of nuclear war occurring . Proponents say disarmament reduces the likelihood of a nuclear war, especially accidentally .
 Major nuclear disarmament groups include Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, Green peace and International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War .
 It was the largest anti-nuclear protest and the largest political demonstration in American history . It was also the largest protest against nuclear weapons in America's history .
 The political and economic barriers to disarmament are considerable, says David Frum . Frum says the barriers are based on the concentrated power of those supporting militaristic approaches to foreign policy .
 Many foundations and universities have failed to support research in disarmament . Instead they favor more ad hoc and limited approaches like arms control, conflict resolution, and limits on weapons systems .
 Bolstering these efforts would be assisted by checking the link between military intervention and nuclear proliferation . Bolstered efforts would also be helped to check the link .
 Many countries fearful of being invaded, particularly by the U.S., have tried to secure or develop nuclear weapons . Many countries have tried or developed nuclear weapons to prevent invasion .
 As a result, policies to limit military interventions may be part of a larger demilitarization program . Policymakers may limit military intervention in the U.S.
 A freeze or a mutually agreed increase is not strictly speaking disarmament at all, he says . He also notes that a freeze or an increase is "not strictly disarmament at all" He says a freeze is not a disarmament .
 Such measures may not even be intended to be a first step towards any kind of reduction or abolition . And such measures may even be aimed at reducing or abolishing the power of the state .
 Disarmament by definition involves inspection and verification procedures . The disarmament process involves inspections and verification of weapons .
 Inspection for Disarmament addresses various problems related to the problem of inspection for disarmament, evasion teams, and capabilities and limitations of aerial inspection . The book by Seymour Melman addresses various issues related to disarmament .
 The weaknesses of the present arms control paradigm have created problems for the idea of disarmament itself . Gradually, as the . idea of arms control displaced the idea . of arms . control, the weaknesses of . the present . arms control paradigrain have created . problems for disarmament
 Nuclear disarmament refers to both the act of reducing or eliminating nuclear weapons and to the end state of a nuclear-free world . The end state is that nuclear weapons are completely eliminated, in which they are eliminated .
 In the 1980s, a popular movement for nuclear disarmament again gained strength in the light of the weapons build-up and aggressive rhetoric of U.S. President Ronald Reagan .
 Reagan had ""a world free of nuclear weapons" as his personal mission, and was largely scorned for this in Europe . Reagan had a mission to free the world from nuclear weapons as his own .
 Reagan was able to start discussions on nuclear disarmament with Soviet Union . His officials tried to stop such talks but Reagan started talks with Russia . Reagan's government tried to prevent such talks, but they were successful .
 In the Soviet Union, voices against nuclear weapons were few and far between . There was no widespread Freedom of speech and Freedom of the pressas political factors .
 Certain citizens who had become prominent enough to criticize the Soviet government, such as Andrei Sakharov, did speak out against nuclear weapons but that was to little effect .
 A series of disarmament and nonproliferation treaties were agreed upon between the United States, the Soviet Union, and several other states throughout the world . The Cold War was a time when the danger of nuclear war became apparent to all sides .
 Many of these treaties involved years of negotiations, and seemed to result in important steps in arms reductions and reducing the risk of nuclear war . Many of the treaties involve years of . negotiations .
 The treaty has three main pillars, nonproliferation, disarmament, and the right to peacefully use nuclear technology . The treaty is based on nonprosiferation and disarmament . The right to peaceful use of nuclear technology is key to the treaty .
 The Soviet Union and the U.S. agreed to a freeze in the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarine-launched ballistic missiles that they would deploy . The freeze was part of the agreement between the two countries to freeze missile production and missile production .
 In a 1974 Protocol, the U.S. and Soviet Union agreed to only deploy an ABM system to one site . The United States and the Soviet Union only agreed to deploy ABM systems at one site in 1974 .
 SALT I, SALT II limited both the Soviet Union and the United States to an equal number of ICBM launchers, SLBM launchers and heavy bombers . The U.S. and Soviet Union were limited to equal numbers of launchers and bombers .
 Created a global ban on shortand long-range nuclear weapons systems, as well as an intrusive verification regime .
 Limited long-range nuclear forces in the United States and. the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union to 6,000 attributed warheads on 1,600 ballistic missiles and bombers . The U.S. and the newly . independent states . of the . former Soviet . Union to the
 CTBT is an international treaty that bans all nuclear explosions in all environments . The CTBT bans nuclear explosions from all environments in the world . The treaty was signed by the U.N. in 1994 .
 The treaty is not in force, Russia has not tested a nuclear weapon since 1990 and the United States has not since 1992 . The United States and Russia have not tested any nuclear weapons since 1990 .
 Several thousand people marched for four days from Trafalgar Square, London, to the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment close to Aldermaston in Berkshire, England, to demonstrate their opposition to nuclear weapons .
 The Aldermaston marches continued into the late 1960s when tens of thousands of people took part in the marches .
 In 1959, a letter in the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists was the start of a successful campaign to stop the Atomic Energy Commission dumping radioactive waste in the sea 19 kilometres from Boston .
 In 1962, Linus Pauling won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work to stop atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons . The ""Ban the Bomb"" movement spread .
 International Day of Nuclear Disarmament protests were held on June 20, 1983 at 50 sites across the United States . Protests were held in the U.S. at 50 locations .
 In 1986, hundreds of people walked from Los Angeles to Washington DC in the Great Peace March for Global Nuclear Disarmantent .
 Nevada Desert Experience protests and peace camps were held at the Nevada Test Site during the 1980s and 1990s . Peace camps were also held at Nevada Test Sites .
 This was the largest anti-nuclear rally in the U.S. for several decades . The rally was held in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 In Britain, there were many protests about the government's proposal to replace the aging Trident weapons system with a newer model .
 According to polls, 59 percent of the public opposed the move . The largest protest had 100,000 participants .
 The International Conference on Nuclear Disarmament took place in Oslo in February, 2008 . The conference was organized by The Government of Norway, the Nuclear Threat Initiative and the Hoover Institute .
 The Conference was entitled Achieving the Vision of a World Free of Nuclear Weapons and had the purpose of building consensus between nuclear weapon states and non-nuclear weapon states in relation to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty .
 The United States Congress has refused to fund many of these policies . To date, the U.S. Congress has rejected many of the policies .
 Some feel that even considering such programs harms the credibility of the U.S. as a proponent of nonproliferation . However, some feel that such programs harm the United States' credibility .
 Reliable Replacement Warhead Program seeks to replace existing warheads with smaller number of warhead types designed to be easier to maintain without testing . This program seeks to . replace existing . warheads with a smaller . number of . warheads .
 Critics say this would lead to a new generation of nuclear weapons . Critics say it would increase pressures to test nuclear tests .
 Complex transformation, formerly known as Complex 2030, is an effort to shrink the United States nuclear weapons complex and restore the ability to produce “pits” the fissile cores of the primaries of United States thermonuclear weapons . Complex transformation is a U.S. effort
 Critics see it as an upgrade to the entire nuclear weapons complex . Critics say it will support the production and maintenance of the new generation of nuclear weapons .
 Formally known as the Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator , this program aimed to modify an existing gravity bomb to penetrate into soil and rock in order to destroy underground targets .
 Critics argue that this would lower the threshold for use of nuclear weapons . Critics say it would reduce the threshold to use nuclear weapons.
 Critics have argued that this would impede nuclear disarmament and possibly stimulate a nuclear arms race . Critics say it would impede disarmament .
 Elements of missile defense are being deployed in Poland and the Czech Republic, despite Russian opposition . Poland and Czech Republic are deploying elements of the missile defense system despite opposition from Russia .
 The United States has taken the lead in ensuring that nuclear materials globally are properly safeguarded . The U.S. has led the way in ensuring nuclear materials worldwide are properly secured .
 Many believe that the funding levels need to be increased to ensure that all dangerous nuelear materials are secured in the most expeditious manner possible .
 The CTR program has led to several other innovative and important nonproliferation programs that need to continue to be a budget priority in order to ensure that nuclear weapons do not spread to hostile nations .
 The CTR program provides funding to help Russia seeure materials that might be used in nuclear or chemical weapons as well as dismantle weapons of mass destruction and their associated infrastructure .
 The GTRI will expand nuclear weapons and material securing and dismantlement activities to states outside of the former Soviet Union . Expanding on the success of the CTR, the GTRi will expand its nuclear weapons .
 The vast majority of states have adhered to the stipulations of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty . A few states have either refused to sign the treaty or pursued nuclear weapons programs while not being members .
 Imperialism is the forceful extension of a nation's authority by territorial conquest or by establishing economic and political domination of other nations that are not its colonies . Imperialism has been defined by the definition of empire .
 In the prehistorical world, clan groups extended their territory and dominated others, competing against each other for food and resources .
 empires have tended to regard themselves as spreading order, morality, the tnae religion and civilization, and have even claimed to occupy the high moral ground . Yet, an interesting aspect of imperialism is that empires, both ancient and modem, have also tended to . regard themselves . as spreading
 Imperial projects ranging from that of Alexander the Great, through the Roman Empire, to the British and Napoleonic empires saw themselves as instruments for good in the world, even though their expansion was usually violent . Imperial projects were often violent, but they were seen as instruments of good .
 Imperialism is often linked with totalitarian enterprises, since the colonized rarely had much say in their governance . Imperialism was often linked to totalitarian enterprises . The colonized often had little say in governance .
 The U.S. regards the defense of democracy and of freedom as fundamental to its identity and mission in the world . Yet it has also engaged in imperial pursuits. The United States regards democracy and free speech .
 Empires have established peace and stability for vast numbers of people . Empires have also established peace, stability in vast parts of the world . Empires are not only empires, but empires have established stability and stability .
 The world has been shaped and molded by the creation and break-up of Empires, forming linguistic and cultural alliances that have survived the negative aspects of cultural and political domination .
 That the world community can speak about shared values and of universal human rights to a large degree follows from the fact that huge portions of the planet formerly lived under imperial rule . The world community has shared shared values with the world since the beginning of the 20th century .
 Small imperial projects vied for power throughout the Middle Ages within the European space . Spain and Portugal, followed by the British, the French, the Dutch, and others, began to encircle the globe .
 The nineteenth century is the ""Age of Imperialism"" and refers to Europeans colonizing other countries . Although the practice dates thousands of years, it dates back to the 1800s . The practice dates to the nineteenth century .
 The term "Imperialism" was coined in the sixteenth century, reflecting the imperial policies of Spain, Portugal, Britain, France, and the Netherlands into Africa and the Americas .
 Earlier, the Pope had divided the world into two on behalf of Spain and Portugal on the condition that missionaries accompany the conquerors . For many involved in the imperial project, the task of spreading Christianity as the only true religion was part of the process .
 Classical convention divided into the House of Islam and House of Rebellion . People lived in a state of unbelief and lived in the state of disbelief . Religiously inspired imperialism also characterized the expansion of Muslim power .
 Currently, ""imperialism" applies to any instance of a greater power acting or being perceived to act at the expense of a lesser power . Currently, it applies to all instances of greater power .
 Including ""perception"" in the definition makes it circular, solipsistic, and subjective . The definition of "perception" is circular and subjective.
 Imperialism not only describes colonial, territorial policies, but also describes economic dominance and influence . Imperialism is a term used to describe economic dominance, influence and economic dominance in colonial times .
 Huge multi or trans-national corporations, whose resources are many times larger than those of other nations, act in their own interests across the globe . Huge multi- or transnational corporations often act in the interests of others .
 In the nineteenth century, European powers imposed trade-treaties and carved out commercial concessions in China, Iran, and the Ottoman Empire . Without actually assuming full political authority and without asserting or acquiring territorial domination .
 The United States pursued a similar policy, although it did acquire some territories as well . The U.S. did acquire territory as well as some territories .
 Economic motivations mingled within the American imperial project with the ideals expressed in the concept of Manifest Destiny, that is, of spreading freedom and democracy around the world as it had across North America . Economic motivations of the imperial project mingled with those of the U.S. imperial project .
 The phenomenon of military posts overseas has been associated with American imperialism . In addition to acquiring overseas possessions, the acquisition of certain overseas possessions has been linked to imperialism .
 Post-World War I, the League of Nations created mandates, that is, territories that had belonged to the defeated powers but were deemed unready for self-government and were entrusted to the victors, whose task it was to construct nation states that would eventually become independent .
 The way that the richer nations of the world dominate the global economic system is regarded as a form of neo-colonialism . The richer nations dominate the world's economic system, including the World Bank .
 The level of financial indebtedness of many developing nations to the West undermines their autonomy and peipetuates Western control . Many developing nations are more dependent on the West than they would otherwise be .
 Inability to meet payments fuels the Western attitude that “these people cannot manage their own economies” and that they w^ere better off when ruled by others, says the IMF .
 The West is largely unwilling to recognize that the impoverishment of parts of the developing world and its continued reliance on aid is a direct result of past imperial exploitation . Yet, the West is still unwilling to acknowledge that the impoverished world is a result of imperial exploitation, the author says .
 Chaotic governance, too, is rarely recognized as the result of the failure of the former imperial powers to nurture mature indigenous leadership . Chaotic governing is often not recognized as a result of a failure to nurture maturity .
 Often, the imperial powers imprisoned the leaders of independence movements and did nothing *o nurture them as genuine democratic politicians . Often, they were imprisoned .
 Lenin's theory of Imperialism is based on his theory of imperialism . Lenin's theories of imperialism were first developed by European intellectuals . Lenin was the founder of the Leninist movement .
 Lenin said capitalism necessarily induced monopoly capitalism as imperialism as imperialism to find new business and resources . The necessary expansion of capitalism beyond the boundaries of nation-states was a foundation of Leninism . Rosa Luxemburg and Hannah Arendt shared the view .
 Marxist scholars extended Lenin's theory to be synonymous with capitalist international trade and banking . Since then, Marxist scholars have extended Marxist scholars' theory to include international trade .
 Karl Marx identified colonialism as an aspect of the prehistory of the capitalist mode of production . Although Karl Marx d)d not publish a theorj' of imperialism, he identified colonialism .
 He analyzed British colonial rule in Ireland and India; it was good for India, being a progressive influence .
 Lenin's definition; ""The highest stage of capitalism"" addressed the time when monopoly finance capital was dominant, forcing nations and private corporations to compete to control the world's natural resources and markets .
 Marxist imperialism theory, and related dependency theory, emphasize economic relationships among countries, rather than formal political and military relationships . Marxism imperialism theory and dependency theory emphasize the economic relationship among countries .
 imperialism is not necessarily direct formal control of one country by another, but the economic exploitation of one by another . Thus, imperialism isn't necessarily direct but economic exploitation is the exploitation of another country .
 This Marxism, contrasts with the popular conception of imperialism, as directly-controlled colonial and neocolonial empires . This Marxism contrasts with popular conceptions of imperialism . The Marxist view of imperialism is that of imperialism as directly controlled colonial .
 At the same time the monopolies, which have grown out of free competition, do not eliminate the latter, but exist above it and alongside it . The monopolies give rise to a number of very acute, intense antagonisms, frictions and conflicts .
 Finance capital replaces industrial capital, as industrial capitalists rely more upon bank-generated finance capital . Industrial capitalists rely on bank generated finance capital for their success .
 The political division of the world by the great powers, wherein exporting finance capital to their colonies allows their exploitation for resources and continued investment . The economic division by multi-national enterprises via international cartels is the world's economic division .
 The super exploitation of poor countries allows the capitalist industrial nations to keep some of their own workers content with slightly higher living standards . This super exploitation allows the rich to keep their own citizens content with higher standards .
 Claimed to be Leninist, the U.S.R. proclaimed itself foremost an enemy of imperialism . Supported armed, national independence movements in the Third World while simultaneously dominating Eastern Europe .
 Marxists and Maoists to the left of Trotsky, such as Tony Cliff, claim the Soviet Union was imperialist . Tony Cliff claims the Soviet Russia was an imperialist state .
 Maoists claim it occurred after Khrushchev's ascension in 1956; Cliff says it occurred under Stalin in the 1940s . Cliff says the incident occurred during Stalin's rule of state of mind .
 Marxists view globalization as imperialism as imperialism's latest incarnation . Marxists believe globalization is imperialism's new incarnation of imperialism .
 Imperial powers have often regarded themselves as superior to others, especially to those people who live in conquered territory . Imperial power has often regarded itself superior to those in conquered territories .
 The Greeks, Romans, the Romans and the nineteenth century European powers, the German and Japanese imperial projects, all saw themselves as culturally, if not as racially, superior .
 It can be argued that Japan's imperial project was copied from the Western powers that tried to interfere in her own affairs and from Germany . Germany also copied her imperial project .
 From the latter, it borrowed the notion of that a great nation and civilization had the right to a breathing space . From the former, it borrows the notion that great nations and civilization should have breathing space, it says .
 On the other hand, imperialism cannot be reduced to a Western phenomena copied by others . On the one hand, it is not a Western phenomenon that can be copied by other nations .
 There were huge empires in Africa, the Americas, and the largest contiguous land empire in history was that of the Mongols . The Mongols ruled the region of Africa and the Americas .
 Even smaller European countries, such as Denmark and Lithuania, have had imperial episodes . Often, the enemy or the “vanquished” were depicted as inferior .
 The idea of the East as less moral, more chaotic than the West dates from ancient Greek attitudes . What people know about the Persians has often been filtered through Greek eyes, which saw them as barbarians .
 This bifurcation of the world into an ordered, moral, civilized West and a chaotic, immoral East has had a huge impact m politics, in the academy and on the popular mind . This has led to a huge change in the world's politics, the academy, and on
 Huntington argues that the clash of ideology that had resulted in the Cold War would in the future be replaced by clashes based on differences between civilizations . Huntington: The clash of ideologies that resulted in Cold War will be replaced with differences between civilization .
 Edward Said has explored how the imperial project resulted in a polarized view of the world in his Culture and Imperialism . Said explores how imperialism has polarized the world and other ways .
 This depiction of the East and of Africa as lacking order served as a moral justification for imperial projects . This depiction . of the . East and . of Africa . as lacking . order served . as moral justification . for imperial . projects .
 European scholars and politicians claimed to ‘know’ the people they studied or ruled better than they knew themselves . The European scholar and colonial administrators claimed to know better than themselves .
 Said argues that this produced a picture of the racial, religious, and cultural ""Other"" that rarely corresponded closely to the reality and that served the economic, political, and even academic interests of Europe . Said argues this served Europe's interests of European interests .
 A sense of personal destiny som_etimes motivated the imperial enterprise . The imperial enterprise was inspired by a sense of destiny .
 The European powers saw themselves as effortlessly superior morally to the Ottoman Empire, of which they were also very jealous . Yet, a comparison of the realities of the Ottoman empire with European empires might suggest that this claim of moral superiority stood on thin ground .
 On the one hand, the technological and cultural achievements of those conquered might be praised but their morality or religion might be condemned . The logic was that the imperial power had some sort of moral or religious right to acquire other peoples land .
 Even when some sort of so-called civilizing mission was embarked upon it was rarely, if ever, the dominant power did not benefit from its imperial enterprise . It was rarely the case that a dominant power didn't benefit from imperial enterprise.
 European powers benefited enormously, using Africa to fuel the Industrial Revolution, but failed to build up vibrant economies or viable infrastructures within their colonies . In the case of Africa, European powers used Africa as a source of fuel for the industrial revolution, but did not build up viable and
 Colonial economies were constructed to serve the interests of the imperial powers, not to meet domestic needs . Colonial economies built to serve imperial powers' interests, not domestic needs, says Dr. Andrew Hammond .
 Post-independence states have been of some benefit to post-independent states . Infrastructure such as roads and railways were constructed and educational institutions were established . But they have also been of benefit to states such as India .
 The experience of rule by a colonial power, in its own interest, easily translated into rule by the president for life,” in his own interest . On the other hand, participation in governance was limited and the experience of the colonial power was limited,’s author says .
 Reconstruction of what African societies were like at the time of European colonial expansion shows that Europeans had more deadly weapons than they did African societies .
 African societies often governed with greater participation and wider consultation than European states . African societies were also often governed by greater participation, wider consultation .
 Notions such as Christopher Columbus ""discovering"" the Americas, that the only civilization produced by Africans was Ancient Egypt or of Australia as not really ""belonging"" to anybody until the British claimed, have become deeply embedded in Western thought .
 Even the naming of the indigenous peoples of the ""Americas"" is problematic . Native American imposes a European name, while the commonly used ""Indian"" arises from the original misconception that Europeans had reached India or islands in that vicinity .
 indigenous peoples in many parts of the world where new nations arose as a result of imperialism are invisible to the majority, or are simply despised . However named, indigenous peoples are still invisible to many in the majority .
 Imperial projects such as those of the Spanish, French, and British have spread language, and shared ideals, around much of the globe . On the other hand, such imperial projects spread language and ideals around the world .
 Communication and transportation infrastructructures built during colonial times have brought more and more people into contact with each other . Despite all the negative experiences of colonialism, colonialism has brought more people to contact .
 More and more people understand themselves as citizens of the world and realize that such challenges such as the ecological crises, eradicating poverty, combating disease can only be met by global cooperation among the nations .
 Talk of universal human rights and the insight of many that shared values permeate the cultures and faiths of the world would be inconceivable but for the imperial enterprises that once crossed the globe . Talk . of universal . human rights . and the understanding of many shared values . permeate many cultures
 Cultural traffic was never one way, despite the racist attitudes of many involved in the imperial project, too . Cultural traffic, despite racist attitudes, was never a way .
 Many people in the West see deep and profound value in aspects of Chinese, Indian, indigenous peoples’ religion, in Sufi Islam .
 New Age and New Religious Movements and other phenomieniena often fuse ideas from East and West . The New Age movement is a fusion of ideas from both sides of the spectrum .
 The non-Westem world has also absorbed much from the West, adapting and adjusting technologies and ideas to suit local requirements, or to conform to local values . The West has kept what it wants and adapts to local requirements .
 Imperial projects can be seen as essential to the process of creating a global consciousness of an inter-dependent world community in which the welfare of all people and the health of the planet itself is the responsibility of all .
 Decolonization refers to the undoing of colonialism, the establishment of governance or authority through the creation of settlements by another country or jurisdiction . The establishment of authority is the establishment or establishment of a new state or authority by a new country .
 The term generally refers to the achievement of independence by the various Western colonies ""and protectorates in Asia and Africa following World War 11 . The term is generally used to refer to the independence achieved by the Western colonies .
 This conforms to an' inte'lectual movement known as Post-Colonialism . Post-colonialism is a movement that seeks to post-colonialism .
 A particularly active period of decolonization occurred between 1945 to 1960, beginning with the independence of Pakistan and the Republic of India from Great Britain in 1947 . The First Indochina War and the First Indohina War were the most significant decolonizations in the world .
 Some national liberation movements were established before the war, but most did not achieve their aims until after it . Most of the movements achieved their aims after the war .
 Decolonization can be achieved by attaining independence, integrating with the administering power or another state, or establishing a ""free association"" status . Decolonizations can be attained by attain independence, integration with the administrative power or establishing "free association" status .
 The United Nations has stated that in the process of decolonization there is no alternative to the principle of self-determination . The U.N. has said that in decolonizing there are no alternatives to self determination .
 The United Nations Trusteeship Council was suspended in 1994, after Palau, the last remaining United Nations trust territory, achieved independence . Palau is the only remaining U.N. trust territory in the world .
 Decolonization may involve peaceful negotiation, non-violent protest or violent revolt and armed struggle . Decolonizing may involve non-violence or violent protest or violence .
 Or, one faction pursues one strategy while another pursues the opposite . The U.S. has been in the midst of a political crisis in recent years .
 Some argue because of neocolonialism many former colonies are not truly free but remain dependent on the world's leading nations . Some argue that because of neocolonial ism many ex-colonies are still not free .
 "No one of principle wants to deny people their freedom, or perpetuate oppression, injustice and inequality," says the president .
 Many celebrate decolonization in the name of freedom and realization of the basic human rights of selfdetermination . Others question whether equality, justice, peace, the end of poverty, exploitation and the dependency of some on others can be achieved if nationstates promote and protect their own interests .
 As freedom spreads around the world, as more people gain the liberty to determine their own futures, some people hope that a new world order might develop, with the nation state receding in significance .
 Global institutions would consider the needs of the planet and all its inhabitants . Instead of global institutions, they would consider global institutions' needs for the planet's needs .
 Decolonization is a political process, frequently involving violence . Methods and stages include methods and stages of the process of decolonization .
 In extreme circumstances, there is a war of independence, sometimes following a revolution . Sometimes it follows a revolution, sometimes the result of an independence war .
 More often, there is a dynamic cycle where negotiations fail, minor disturbances ensue resulting in suppression by the police and military forces, escalating into more violent revolts that lead to further negotiations until independence is granted .
 In rare cases, the actions of the native population are characterized by non-violence . Violence comes as active suppression from the occupying forces or as political opposition from forces representing minority local communities who feel threatened .
 In some countries in French West Africa decolonization resulted from a combination of insurrection and negotiation . For example, there was a war of independence in French Indochina . Decolonization in some countries resulted from the result of an insurrection .
 Independence is often difficult to achieve without the encouragement and practical support from one or more external parties . Independence is difficult without the help of external parties, such as the government .
 As world opinion became more pro-emancipation following World War I, there was an institutionalized collective effort to advance the cause of emancipation through the League of Nations . The League was formed in response to World War II .
 Under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, a number of mandates were created . The reality was merely a redistribution of control over the former colonies of the defeated powers, mainly Germany and the Ottoman Empire .
 Trust territories were created to adjust control over former colonies and mandated territories administered by the nations defeated in World War II . This reassignment work continued through the United Nations, with similar system of trust territories .
 In 1960, the UN General Assembly adopted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples . The Declaration was adopted by the UN in 1960 .
 This stated that all people have a right to self-determination and proclaimed that colonialism should be speedily and unconditionally brought to an end . This proclaimed that all of us have the right to freedom of expression .
 Some wanted to place oversight of decolonization process of non-self governing ten-itories under the oversight of the Trusteeship Council .
 UN Charter did not explicitly affirm self-determination as a right; instead. Not only was this resisted by the colonial powers, but by the UN Charter . Self-determination was not explicitly affirmed in the UN charter, it was resisted by colonial powers .
 The Trusteeship Council was only responsible for supervising progress towards independence of Trust territories . The colonial powers were required to report to the UN Secretary-General on the ""educational, social and economic conditions"" in their territories .
 In referendums, some colonized populations have chosen to retain their colonial status . Gibraltar and French Guiana are some of the colonies that have been colonized . Gibraltar is one of the most colonized territories in the world .
 colonial powers have sometimes promoted decolonization in order to shed financial, military and other burdens that tend to grow in those colonies where the colonial regimes have become more benign . On the other hand, colonial powers sometimes promote decolonialization to shed the financial burdens .
 Empires have expanded and contracted throughout histoiy but, in several respects, decolonization has produced different outcomes . Decolonization is the modem phenomenon of decolonizing countries .
 When states surrender both the de facto rule of their colonies and their de jure claims to such rule, the ex-colonies are generally not absorbed by other powers . Now, when states surrender to their former colonies, they surrender both, and de facto, their de facto claims to
 Former colonial powers have maintained their status as Powers, retaining strong economic and cultural ties with their former colonies . Further, they have, inost cases, not only continued existing, but have also maintained .
 The final phase of decolonization may be little more than handing over responsibility for foreign relations and security . Thus, the final phase may be the handing over of foreign relations, security .
 A degree of continuity can be maintained through bilateral treaties involving practicalities such as military training, mutual protection pacts or even a garrison and/or military bases .
 There is some debate over whether or not the United States, Canada and Latin America can be considered decolonized . It was the colonist and their descendants who revolted and declared their independence instead of the indigenous peoples .
 Scholars such as Elizabeth Cook-Lynn and Devon Mihesuah have argued that portions of the United States still are in need of decolonization .
 Internal decolonization can occur within a sovereign state . Decolonization in a broad sense can occur in a country's borders .
 The expansive United States created territories, destined to colonize conquered lands bordering existing states . Once their development proved successful allowed them to petition statehood within the federation, granting not external independence but internal equality .
 France internalized several overseas possessions as Departements d'outre-mer . The Departement d'Outremer is a French state of origin .
 Even in a state which legally does not colonize any of its 'integral' parts, real inequality often causes the politically dominant component often the largest and/or most populous part, or the historical conqueror to be perceived, at least subjectively, as a colonizer in all
 To complicate matters even further, this may coincide with another element, which could be another element .
 Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania argue that they could not have been granted independence at the dismemberment of the Soviet Union because they never joined, but were militarily annexed by Stalin . The three Baltic republics argue they were illegally colonized by Stalin, including massive deportations of their nationals
 Most ethnic Russians were so much identified with the Soviet 'colonization' they felt unwelcome and migrated back to Russia . Even in other post-Soviet states which had formally acceded, most ethnic Russians felt unwelcome .
 When the UN was established, roughly one-third of the world was under some type of colonial rule . The UN was set up in 1903, when it was established .
 At the start of the twenty-first century, less than two million people live under such governance . Less than 2 million people in the world now live under governance .
 The rebellion of the 13 American colonies of the British Empire is one of the most significant, and early, events in the history of pre-1918 decolonization .
 This established the principles that people have the right to rebel against what they perceive to be unjust rule and governance in which they have no participation . The principles were set out in the wake of the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Canada, Australia and New Zealand became Dominions in 1867, 1901 and 1907 respectively . Determined not to totally lose other settler colonies, developed a system to grant selfnile within the Empire .
 Britain was reluctant to grant non-settler colonies veryuch participation in governance . After 1919 through the League of Nations mandate system expanded its empire by acquiring Iraq and Palestine .
 Decolonization also took place within the Ottoman imperial space, beginning with Greece whose independence was recognized in 1831 . Greece's independence from the Ottoman Empire was recognized as a result of the revolution .
 The great powers supported Greece but were well aware of the ambiguity of their position . Great powers, who had much to say about the ""Turkish yoke"" and the "Turkish peril"
 The Ottomans possessed Empires and theirs were no less oppressive than that of the Ottomsans . They also possessed Empires . Their Empires were more oppressive than those of the Ottoman Empire .
 Austria-Hungary was especially reluctant to see the collapse of the Ottoman Empire . The future of their own system, governed by a more or less absolute niler, might be bound up with that of a similar polity .
 provinces of the Balkans revived memories of their medieval kingdoms and began freedom struggles . However, inspired by the new ideal of nationalism stimulated by the French and AmCancan revolutions, provinces m the Balkans began to revolt .
 One by one, the Ottoman Empire lost its European possessions until by the start of World War I none were left . The Ottoman Empire was one of the last few European possessions left of the Empire .
 After the war, the rest of its empire was distributed among Britain, France and Italy . The rest of the empire was divided between Britain and France .
 The American colonies in the South under mainly Spanish rule with Brazil under Portugal began a series of independence movements .
 The second county in the region to gain its freedom was Haiti, where a slave uprising started in 1791 . Haiti was the first county to win its freedom .
 The wars for the independence of South America began in 1806 to and continued until 1826 . The wars began in South America between 1806 and the end of the war .
 Most Central American countries gained independence in 1821, namely Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama . Costa Rica was one of the first countries to gain independence .
 Guyana, also British, became independent in 1966 and Surinam, a Netherlands colony, in 1975 . Guyana became independent from British colonial rule in 1966 . Surinama, also a Dutch colony, was a British colony until 1975 .
 The extraordinary material demands of the conflict had spread economic change across the world . The associated social pressures of ""war imperialism"" created both peasant uraest and a burgeoning middle class . The resulting social pressures created both peasants and a growing middle class.
 Economic growth created stakeholders with their own demands, while racial issues meant these people stood apart from the colonial middle-cla«s and had to form their own group .
 The start of mass nationalism, as a concept and practice, would fatally undermine the ideologies of imperialism, writes David Frum . Frum says mass nationalism would undermine imperialism .
 There were, naturally, other factors, from agrarian change, changes in religion , and the impact of the depression of the 1930s .
 The Great Depression, despite the concentration of its impact on the industrialized world, was also exceptionally damaging in the rural colonies . The Depression was particularly damaging in rural colonies, especially in rural areas .
 Agricultural prices fell much harder and faster than those of industrial goods . Agricultural prices fall much harder than industrial goods. Agricultural prices were much higher than industrial ones .
 colonial powers concentrated on domestic issues, protectionism and tariffs, disregarding the damage done to international trade flows . The colonial powers focused on domestic problems, rather than international issues .
 The colonies, almost all primary ""cash crop"" producers, lost the majority of their export income . The colonies were forced away from the ""open"" complementary colonial economies to ""closed"" systems .
 Some areas returned to subsistence farming, others diversified, and some began to industrialize . Some areas began to be industrialized, but others were not .
 These economies would not fit the colonial strait-jacket when efforts were made to renew the links . These economies wouldn't fit the . straitjacket, writes Andrew Hammond .
 European-owned and -run plantations proved more vulnerable to extended deflation than native capitalists, reducing the dominance of ""white"" farmers in colonial economies . The European governments and investors of the 1930s co-opt indigenous elites — despite the implications for the future .
 The efforts at colonial reform also hastened their end — notably the move from non-interv'entionist collaborative systems to directed, disruptive management to drive economic change .
 The creation of a genuine bureaucratic government boosted the formation of indigenous bourgeoisie . It was the creation of genuine bureaucratic .
 This was especially true in the British Empire, which seemed less capable in controlling political nationalism . The British Empire was less able to control political nationalism, especially in Britain .
 The British made deals with the nationalist elites in the 1930s and 1940s . They were driven by pragmatic demands and manpower demands .
 The Raj made numerous reforms in the Raj, culminating in the Government of India Act . They dealt with the white Dominions, retained strategic resources at the cost of reducing direct control in Egypt .
 Tropical Africa was not fully drawn into the colonial system before the end of the 19th century . Only the complexities of the Union of South Africa and the Empire of Ethiopia were included .
 There were no indigenous nationalist groups with widespread popular support before 1939 . No indigenous nationalists had widespread support before the war .
 At end of Spanish-American War, at the end of the nineteenth century, the United States of America held several colonial territories seized from Spain . Among them were the Philippines and Puerto Rico .
 The United States had initially embarked upon a policy of colonization of these territories . By the 1930s, the United States policy for the Philippines had changed toward eventual self-government .
 The Philippines gained independence peacefully from the United States in 1946 . Following the invasion and occupation of the Philippines by Japan during World War II, the Philippines gained peace from the U.S.
 Other U.S. possessions, such as Puerto Rico, did not have full independence . Puerto Rico and Puerto Rico did not .
 Puerto Ricans have held U.S. citizenship since 1917, but do not pay federal income tax . Puerto Rican citizens have been citizens of the United States since 1917 . Puerto Rico does not pay income tax, but does not have citizenship .
 Puerto Ricans can vote in U.S. Presidential elections for the first time . In 2000, a United States District judge ruled that Puerto Rico could vote in US Presidential elections . Puerto Rican voters can now vote in the presidential elections .
 Puerto Rico achieved self-government in 1952 and became a commonwealth in association with the United States . Puerto Rico is a U.S. commonwealth with Puerto Rico .
 Puerto Rico was taken off the UN list of non-sovereign territories in 1953 through resolution 748 . Puerto Rico is now a US state of origin .
 In 1967, 1993 and 1998, Puerto Rican voters rejected proposals to grant the territory U.S. statehood or independence . The territory has never been granted statehood, independence .
 The island's political status remains a hot topic of debate . Nevertheless, the island's politics remain a top political topic of discussion .
 As the only Asian nation to become a colonial power during the modem era, Japan had gained several substantial colonial concessions in east Asia such as Taiwan and Korea . Japan was the only country in the world to become the only .
 Japa-i settled significant populations of ethnic Japanese in its colonies . It also suppressed indigenous ethnic populations by enforcing the learning and use of Japanese language in schools .
 Other methods such as public inieraciion, and uttempts to eradicate the use of Korean and Taiwanese among the indigenous peoples, were seen to be used .
 Japan also set up Imperial university in Korea and Taiwan to Compel education . Imperial university set up in Korea, Taiwan and Taiwan . Imperial universities in both countries set up to encourage education .
 World War II gave Japan occasion to conquer vast swaths of Asia . It swept into China and seized the Western colonies of Vietnam, Hong Kong, the Philippines, Burma, Malaya, Timor and Indonesia among others .
 Following its surrender to the Allies in 1945, Japan was deprived of all its colonies . The Japanese government was forced to withdraw its colonies in 1945 .
 Japan claims the southern Kuril Islands are a small portion of its own national territory, colonized by the Soviet Union . Japan further claims that the southern part of the Kuril islands are a part of its national territory .
 After World War I, the colonized people were frustrated at France's failure to recognize the effort provided by the French colonies . French Decolonization was the first French colony to be decolonized .
 The French state had no intention to allow self-rule, let alone independence to the colonized people . The Great Mosque of Paris was constructed as recognition of these efforts .
 nationalism in the colonies became stronger in between the two wars, leading to Abd el-Krim*§ Rif War in Morocco and the creation of Messali Hadj's Star of North Africa in Algeriain 1925 .
 The October 27, 1946 Constitution creating the Fourth Republic substituted the French Union to the colonial empire . The French Union was replaced by the French Republic in 1946 .
 Charles de Gaulle returned to power in 1958 amidst turmoil and threats of a rightwing coup d Etat to protect ""French Algeria" The decolonization was completed with the independence of Sub-Saharan Africa's colonies in 1960 and the March 19, 1962 Evian Accords .
 The OAS movement unsuccessfully tried to block the accords with a series of bombings, including an attempted assassination against Charles de Gaulle . The movement unsuccessfully attempted to block them with bombings .
 The Algerian war, officially called until the 1990s a ""public order operation," remains a trauma for both France and Algeria . To this day, the war was officially called a ""Public order operation""
 Philosopher Paul Ricoeur has spoken of the necessity of a ""decolonization of memory,"" starting with the recognition of the 1961 Paris massacre during the Algerian war . The role of African and especially North African immigrant manpower in the Trente Glorieuses post-World War
 In the 1960s, French employers actively sought to recruit manpower from the colonies, explaining today's multiethnic population . France's post-war reconstruction and rapid economic growth led to the influx of foreign workers .
 Soviet Union sought to effect the abolishment of colonial governance by Western countries . The Soviet Union tried to subvert Western-leaning governments or indirectly by influence of political leadership and support .
 Many of the revolutions of this time period were inspired or influenced in this way . The revolution of the 19th century was inspired or inspired by the French Revolution .
 The conflicts in Vietnam, Nicaragua, Congo, and Sudan, among others, have been characterized as such . The conflicts have been described as such.
 Most Soviet leaders expressed the Marxist-Leninist view that imperialism was the height of capitalism, and generated a class-stratified society . The Soviet leaders believed imperialism was capitalism, the view that it was capitalism .
 It followed, then, that Soviet leadership would encourage independence movements in colonized territories, especially as the Cold War progressed . The Soviet leadership encouraged independence movements .
 Communist countries supported anti-colonialist movements in various countries still under colonial administration through propaganda, developmental and economic assistance, and some cases military aid . During the Vietnam War, Communist countries provided military aid to Vietnam .
 Cuba and the Soviet Union supported armed rebel movements in Angola and Vietnam . Cuba in Angola, Vietnam in Vietnam in the 1960s, supported rebel movements .
 The Russian Empire expanded via land across Asia . England, Spain, Portugal, France, and the Netherlands took colonies overseas . It is noteworthy that while the Empire expanded overseas, the Russian Empire did .
 "The emergence of this new political entity, in the frame of the Cold War, was complex and painful," he says . The emergence of the political entity was complex, painful, he adds .
 The Non-Aligned Movement was formed around the main figures of Nehru, the leader of India, The Indonesian prime minister, Tito the Communist leader of Yugoslavia, and Nasser, head of Egypt who successfully opposed the French and British imperial powers during the 1956 Suez crisis .
 The 1955 Bandung Conference gathered Nasser, Nehru, Tito, Sukarno and Zhou Enlai . The conference was held after the 1954 Geneva Conference which put an end to the French war in Vietnam .
 In 1960, the UN General Assembly voted the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples . The Declaration was approved by the UN in 1960 .
 NIEO opposed the 1944 Bretton Woods system, which had benefited the leading states which had created it, and remained in force until after the 1973 oil crisis . NIEO was opposed to the 1944 Bretton Woods system .
 Developing countries must be entitled to regulate and control the activities of multinational corporations operating within their territory . Developing nations must control and control multinational corporations in their territory, says the UN .
 They must be free to nationalize or expropriate foreign property on conditions favorable to them . They must also be free from expropriation or nationalization of foreign property, the government says .
 All other States must recognize this right and refrain from taking economic, military, or political measures calculated to restrict it . They must be free to set up voluntary association of primary commodities producers similar to OPEC to reduce oil prices and payments to producers .
 The UNCTAD however wasn't very effective in implementing this New International Economic Order . Social and economic inequalities between industrialized countries and the Third World kept on growing through-out the 1960s until the twenty-first century .
 1973 oil crisis followed the Yom Kippur War was triggered by the OPEC which decided an embargo against the U.S. and Western countries . The embargo lasted five months, starting on October 17, 1973, and ending on March 18,1974 .
 OPEC nations agreed to raise crude oil prices by ten percent in January 1975 . OPEC nations then agreed, on January 7 1975, to raise prices by 10 percent .
 OPEC nations joined the call for a New International Economic Order to be initiated by coalitions of primary producers . At that time, OPEC nations had recently nationalized their oil industries .
 OPEC Summit ends in Algiers . Leaders call for stable and just commodity prices . Food and agriculture program, technology transfer from North to South .
 Oil companies invest most of their research capital in the U.S. and European countries . But industrialized countries quickly began to look for substitutes to OPEC petroleum .
 The second oil crisis occurred in the wake of the 1979 Iranian Revolution . The second Iranian oil crisis was in the 1980s .
 The 1982 Latin American debt crisis exploded in Mexico first, then Argentina and Brazil, who were unable to pay back their debts . The crisis jeopardized the existence of the international economic system . The debt crisis began in Mexico in 1982, followed by Argentina in 1982 .
 The 1990s were characterized by the prevalence of the Washington neoliberal policies, ""structural adjustment"" and ""shock therapies"" for the former Coirununist states, to transform command economies into self-sustaining trade-based economies .
 Ruben Um Nyobe was the leader of the Union of the Peoples of Cameroon . He was killed by the French army on September 13, 1958 .
 Barthelemy Boganda was the leader of a nationalist Central African Republic movement . He died in a plane crash on March 29, 1959, eight days before the last elections of the colonial era .
 Patrice Lumumba was the first Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo . He was assassinated on January 17, 1961 .
 Burundi nationalist Louis Rwagasore was assassinated on October 13, 1961, while Pierre Ngendandumwe was also murdered on January 15, 1965 . The first Hutuj prime minister was assassinated in 1965 .
 Sylvanus Olympio, the first president of Togo, was assassinated in 1963 . Olympio was assassinated on January 13, 1963 . He was assassinated by a coup d'etroze .
 Gnassingbe Eyaddma ruled Togo for nearly 40 years . He died in 2005 and was succeeded by his son Faure Gnassing be . He would be replaced by his successor, Gnassassbe Eyadma, who ruled the country for 40 years.
 Mehdi Ben Barka was the leader of the Moroccan National Union of Popular Forces and of the Tricontinental Conference, which was supposed to prepare in 1966 in Havanaits first meeting .
 Eduardo Mondlane, the leader of FRELIMO and the father of Mozambican independence, was assassinated in 1969 . Mondlane was allegedly assassinated by Aginter Press, the Portuguese branch of Gladio, NATO's paramilitary organization during the Cold War .
 Abeid Karume was the first president of Zanzibar . He was assassinated in April 1972 . He is now the president of the island .
 Outel Bono, Chadian opponent of Fran 9 ois Tombalbaye, was assassinated on August 26, 1973, making yet another example of the existence of the Fran 9 afrique . This term is designed by this term post-independent neocolonial ties between France and
 Herbert Chitepo, leader of the Zimbabwe African National Union, was assassinated on March 18, 1975 . He was assassinated in the Zimbabwe capital, Zimbabwe .
 Oscar Romero, prelate archbishop of San Salvador and proponent of liberation theology, was assassinated on March 24, 1980 16 . Oscar Romero was assassinated in San Salvador . Romero was a proponent of the liberation theology .
 Dulcie September was investigating an arms trade between France and South Africa . She was murdered in Paris in 1988, a few years before the end of apartheid .
 Many of these assassinations are still unsolved cases as of 2007 . Foreign power interference is undeniable in many of these cases . Others were for internal matters .
 France and the U.S. have refused to declassify files they acknowledge having in their possession . The investigation concerning M^Jidi Ben Barka is continuing to this day .
 The Phoenix Program, a CIA program of assassination during the Vietnam War, should also be named . Phoenix Program was also a CIA assassination program . The Phoenix program was also known as The Phoenix .
 Former colonial powers created institutions which more loosely associated their former colonies . Post-colonial organizations are loosely associated with former colonies.
 Membership is voluntary, and can be revoked if member state loses some objective criteria . membership is voluntary and membership is a member state of the European Union .
 The organizations serve cultural, economic, and political purposes between the associated countries . No such organization has become politically prominent as a political entity in its own right .
 Decolonization generates debate and controversy over the role of the colonisation of the Americas .
 There has been much debate over the best way to grant full independence . The end goal tends to be universally regarded as good, but there has been some debate .
 Some say the post-World War n decolonization movement was too rushed, especially in Africa . Some say it resulted in the creation of unstable regimes in newly independent countries .
 Others argue that this instability is largely the result of problems from the colonial period, including arbitrary nation-state borders, lack of training of local populations and disproportional economy .
 By the twentieth century most colonial powers were slowly being forced by the moral beliefs of population to increase the welfare of their colonial subjects . However by the 20th century most colonial powers were forced to increase their welfare of their subjects .
 Some would argue a form of colonization still exists in the fonn of economic colonialism carried out by U.S. owned corporations operating across the globe . Some argue that colonialism still exists .
 Post-World War II decolonization was brought about for economic reasons . John Kenneth Galbraith argues that the decolonialization is brought about by economic factors . He argues that decolonizations were brought about because of the economic benefits .
 In A Journey Through Economic Time, he writes, "The engine of economic well-being was now within and between the advanced industrial countries" He writes that the engine of prosperity was now between and between industrial countries .
 The departuie of India and Pakistan made small economic difference in Britain . Pakistan and India have been the two countries most populous in the world .
 Dutcheconomists calculated that the economic effect from the loss of the Dutch empire in Indonesia was compensated for by a couple of years or so of domestic post-war economic growth .
 The end of the colonial era is celebrated in the history books as a triumph of national aspiration in the former colonies and of benign good sense by the colonial powers .
 The coionizer no longer had the burden of obligation, financial or otherwise, for their colony . The colony's inhabitants no longer have the burden to support each other, but they do .
 The colonizer continued to obtain cheap goods and labor as well as economic benetits from the former colonies . The coloniser continued to be able to get cheap goods, labor and labor from the colonies .
 Financial, political and military pressure could still be used to achieve goals desired by the colonizer . Financial, military and political pressure could be used in order to achieve objectives desired by colonizers .
 The most obvious difference is the ability of the colonizer to disclaim responsibility for the colonized . The colonizer is not responsible for the people he colonized, he says .
 Decolonization is not an easy adjustment in colonies where a large population of settlers live, particularly if they have been there for several generations . Effects on the former colonies are not always easy to adjust to new colonies .
 This population, in general, may have to be repatriated, often losing considerable property . This population may also be forced to leave the country .
 The decolonization of Algeria by France was particularly uneasy due to the large European and Sephardic Jewish population . The Jewish population of Algeria largely evacuated to France when A’gena became independent .
 In Zimbabwe, former Rhodesia, president Robert Mugabe has targeted white farmers and forcibly seized their property . In Zimbabwe he has forcibly seized white farmers' property .
 Decolonization is hardly possible or impossible because of the importance of the settler population or where the indigenous population is now in the minority . Such is case of the British population of the Cayman Islands and the Russian population of Kazakhstan .
 Critics of the continued dependence of many former colonies on the developed world sometimes offer this as a defense of colonialism, or of neocolonialism as a necessary evil .
 The inability of countries in the former colonial empires to create stable, viable economies and democratic systems is blamed on ancient tribal animosities and congenital inability to order their affairs .
 The way in which Africa and Africans are depicted in works of fiction, too, perpetuates stereotypes of dependency, primitiveness, tribalism and tribalism .
 Those who argue that continued dependency stems in part from a psychology that informs an attitude of racial, intellectual or cultural inferiority are also speaking of the need to decolonize the mind .
 The study of the African realities has for too long been seen in terms of tribes . The study has been seen as a study of African realities rather than tribalism .
 Even literature is sometimes evaluated in terms of the ‘tribal’ origins and composition of the characters in a given novel or play .
 This misleading stock interpretation of the African realities has been popularized by the western media . It likesto deflects people from seeing that imperialism is still the root cause of many problems in Africa . The western media has popularized this misleading interpretation .
 The origin of the term "Eurocommunism" was subject to great debate in the mid1970s . It was attributed to Zbigniew Brzezmski and Arrigo Levi, among others, .
 DeutschlandArchiv decided that the word was first used in the summer of 1975 by Yugoslav journalist Frane Barbieri, former editor of Belgi'ade's NIN .
 Antonio Gramsci's theory questioned sectarianism of the Left and encouraged communist parties to develop social alliances to win social support for social reforms . Theoretical foundations of Eurocommunism were the theoretical foundations of the Marxist theory . The main theoretical foundation of the Eurocommunist was Antonio G
 Early inspirations can also be found m the Austromarxism and its seeking of a ""third"" democratic ""v/ay"" to socialism . Early inspiration can be found in the Austro-Austrianism .
 In the 1980s the traditional, pro-Soviet faction broke away, calling the main party revisionist . In the 1990s the pro-Russian faction split away from the party .
 Santiago Carrillo wrote Eurocommunism's defining book Eurocomunismo y estado . He participated in the development of the liberal democratic constitution as Spain emerged from dictatorship of Franco .
 Communist parties of Great Britain, Belgium, Belgium and Austria also turned Eurocommunist . Communist parties in Great Britain and Belgium also turned into Eurocommunists .
 Western European communists came to Eurocommunism via a variety of routes . Eurocommunistism came to Europe via a number of different routes .
 For some it was their direct experience of feminist and similar action . For others it was a direct experience with similar action. For others, it was an experience of their own .
 For others its was a reaction to the political events of the Soviet Union, at the apogee of what Mikhail Gorbachev later called the Era of Stagnation . For others it was the reaction to political events in the USSR .
 This process wa.'’ accelerated after the events of 1968, particularly the crushing of the Prague Spring . This process was accelerated in 1968, especially after the crush of the 'Prague Spring'
 Western communists were under less pressure to follow Soviet orthodoxy yet also wanted to engage with a rise in western proletarian militancy such as Italy's Hot Autumn and Britain's shop steward's movement .
 Outside Western Europe Eurocommunist ideas won at least partial acceptance outside of Western Europe . Eurocommunism was a form of anti-communistism in the 1960s .
 Mikhail Gorbachev refers to eurocommunism as a key influence on the ideas of glasnost and perestroika in his memoirs . The Soviet Union was founded in 1987 .
 Eurocommunism was in many ways only a staging ground for changes in the political structure of the European left . Eurocommunistism was only a stage ground for political changes in Europe .
 The French party during the 1980s reverted to a more pro-Soviet stance . Some of the Italians became social democrats, while others like the Dutch CPN moved into green politics . The Italian party became a social democracy in the 1960s .
 Aldo Moro's murder in 1978 was a consequence of this new policy . The compromesso storico with Democrazia Cristiana was stopped by Aldo Mamo's murder . The new policy was a result of the murder of Moro .
 The collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War put practically all Leftist parties in Europe on the defensive . Many Eurocomrnunist parties split, with the Right factions adopting social democracy more whole-heartedly .
 Two main criticisms have been advanced against Eurocommunism . Criticism has been made of Eurocommunist policies . Eurocommunists' policies have been criticised for their policies .
 This ""timidity"" has been expla/ped as ihe fear of losing old members and supporters, many of whom admired the USSR, or wi;;n a desire to keep the support of a strong and powerful country .
 Other critics point out the difficulties the Eurocommunist, parties had in developing a clear and recognisable strategy .
 Eurocommunists have always claimed to be different not only from Soviet Communism but also from Social Democracy . In practice, they were always very similar to at least one of these tendencies . Eurocommunistism was very different to Soviet Communism .
 Critics argue that Eurocommunism does not have a well-defined identity and cannot be regarded as a separate movement in its own right . Thus, critics argue that . Eurocommunistism is not a separate political movement .
 The Bitter Fruits of 'Socialism in One Country' views Eurocommunism as a subsequent development of the decision taken by the Soviet Union in 1924 to abandon the goal of world revolution and concentrate on social and economic development . Eurocommunistism is the result of a decision taken
 The Eurocommunists of the Italian and French Communist parties are considered to be nationalist movements . They were considered to have abandoned internationalism . Together with the Soviet Union, the Communist parties abandoned internationalistism .
 Social democratic parties of the Second International during the First World War, when they supported their national governments m prosecution of the war . This is analogous to the Social Democratic Party's support for the war in the 1930s and 1940s .
 From an Anti-Revisionist point of view, Enver Uoxha in Eurocommunism is /•‘mti-Communism’s . The Anti-Communist views Eurocommunist as the result of Nikita Khrushchev's policy of peaceful co
 Khrushchev was accused of being a revisionist who encouraged conciliation with the bourgeoisie rather than adequately calling for its overtlirow . Khrushchev was accused . of encouraging conciliation rather than calling for the bourgeoisie .
 The Soviet Union's refusal to reject Palmiro Togliatti's theory of polycentrism encouraged the various pro-Soviet Communist parties to moderate their views in order to join cabinets, which in turn forced them to abandon Marxism-Leninism as their leading ideology . Fie also
 Critics felt vindicated when several Eurocommunist parties scrapped their communist credentials following the fall of the Soviet Union . Such critics felt strongly vindicated by the move .
 Nationatism Nationalism is a political ideology that involves a strong identification of a group of individuals with a political entity defined in national terms, i.e. a nation . Nationatism is a belief system that involves the identification of people with a national political entity .
 In the 'modernist' image of the nation, it is nationalism that creates national identity . In the "modernist" image, nationalism is created to create national identity, the author says .
 There are various definitions for what constitutes a nation, however, which leads to several rferef-' strands of nationalism .
 It can also include the belief that the state is of primaiy importance . It is a belief that one state is naturally superior to all other states . The belief that a state is superior to other states is also a belief .
 It is also used to describe a movement to establish or protect a 'homeland' for an ethnic group . It is often used in the UK as a movement for establishing or protecting a 'Homeland'
 In some cases the identification of a national culture is combined with a negative view of other races or cultures . The identification of national culture can be combined with negative views of other cultures .
 nationalism might also be portrayed as collective identities toward imagined communities which are not naturally expressed in language, race or religion but rather socially constructed by the very individuals that belong to a given nation . Conversely, nationalism might be portrayed .
 Nationalism is sometimes reactionary, calling for <a return to a national past, and sometimes for the expulsion of foreigners . Nationalism calls for a return to the national past .
 Other forms of nationalism are revolutionary, calling for the establishment of an independent state as a homeland for an ethnic underclass . Other forms are revolutionary .
 Nationalism emphasizes collective identity a 'people' must be autonomous, united, and express a single national culture . Nationalism is a form of nationalism that emphasizes a collective identity .
 Liberal nationalists stress individualism as an importar,t part of their own national identity . However, liberal nationalists stress individuality as an important part of the nation's identity .
 National flags, national anthems, and other s^bols of national identity are often considered sacred, as if they were religious rather than political symbols . National flags and national songs are considered sacred .
 Gellner and Breuilly, in Nations and Nationalism, contrast nationalism and patriotism . They contrast nationalism with patriotism . The authors say patriotism is a form of nationalism .
 The term nationalism was coined by Johann Gottfried Herder during the late 1770s . Herder coined the term nationalism in the late 1800s in Germany .
 Precisely how and when nationalism emerged is difficult to determine . Development closely related to that of the modem state and push for popular sovereignty that surfaced with the French Revolution and the American Revolution in the late 18th century .
 Fascism is a form of authoritarian nationalism which stresses loyalty and obedience to the state . Fascism stresses absolute loyalty and loyalty to state, whose purpose is to serve its nation alone .
 Civic nationalism defines the nation as an association of people who identify themselves as belonging to the nation . People have equal and shared political rights, and allegiance to similar political procedures . Varieties Civic nationalism and Civic nationalism are different .
 According to the principles of civic nationalism, the nation is not based on common ethnic ancestry, but is a political entity whose core identity is not ethnicity . The nation's core identity has not been defined by ethnicity, but by civic nationalism .
 Civic Nationalism is a kind of non-xenophobic nationalism compatible with liberal values of freedom, tolerance, equality, and individual rights . Civic nationalism is compatible with freedom and tolerance in liberal values .
 Ernest Renan and John Stuart Mill are often thought to be early liberal nationalists . Renan was an early leader of the British National Party . Mill and Renan are thought to have been early nationalists .
 Liberal nationalists often defend the value of national identity in order to lead meaningful, autonomous lives . Liberal democratic polities need national identity to function properly, they say .
 Civic nationalism lies within the traditions of rationalism and liberalism, but as a form of nationalism it is contrasted with ethnic nationalism . Civic nationalism is an ideal form of national unity .
 natioi^lism does not necessarily imply a belief in the superiority of one ethnicity over others . Some nationalists support ethnocentric protectionism . Ethnocentrism is not necessarily synonymous with supremacy .
 Studies have yielded evidence that such behaviour may be derived from innate preferences in humans from infancy . Such behaviour may have been learned from infancy, according to studies .
 Sometimes a mythic homeland is more important for the national identity than the actual territory occupied by the nation . The nation's national identity is defined by mythic places rather than actual territory .
 Left-wing tiationalism is a political movement combining left-wing politics with nationalism . The movement combines left-right politics with nationalism .
 nationalist movements are dedicated to national liberation, in the view that their nations are being persecuted by other nations . Many nationalist movements believe their nations need to exercise self-determination by liberating themselves from the accused persecutors .
 Anti-revisionist Marxist-Leninism is closely tied with this ideology . Examples include Stalin's early work Marxism and the National Question and his Socialism in One Country edict .
 Other examples of left-wing nationalism include Ireland's Sinn Fein, Wales's Plaid Cymru, Scotland's SNP and the Awami League in Bangladesh .
 Territorial nationalism assumes that all inhabitants of a particular nation owe allegiance to their country of birth or adoption . It assumes allegiance to a nation's birth, adoption, adoption or birth place .
 A sacred quality is sought in the nation and in the popular memories it evokes . The nation's most recent president has been Barack Obama . He has been elected to the presidency of the United States .
 A criterion of a territorial nationalism is the establishment of a mass, public culture based on common values and traditions of the population . Citizenship is idealised by the territorial nationalist . Citizenship should be based on the values of the people, rather than traditions, say experts .
 Ultranationalism is a zealous nationalism that expresses extremist support for one's nationalist ideals . Ultrannationalism is an expression of extreme support for the country's nationalistic ideals . It is also known as an extreme nationalism .
 Prevalent ultranationalism typically leads to or is the result of conflict within a state, and or between states, and is identified as a condition of pre-war in national politics . Ultranationalistism is often identified as condition of national politics, or a result of
 In its extremist forms ultranationalism is characterized as a call to war against enemies of the nation/state, secession or genocide . In the case of ethnocentrist ultranism, genocide is genocide or secession .
 Fascism is a form of palingenetic ultranationalism that promotes ""class collaboration"", a totalitarian state, and irredentism or expansionism to unify and allow the growth of a nation . Fascism promotes class collaboration, totalitarianism and expansionism . Fasc
 Fascism stresses subservience of the individual to the state, and the need to absolute and unquestioned loyalty to a strong ruler . Fascism is the need for absolute loyalty to the strong ruler, says the author .
 Anti-colonial Nationalism came about during the decolonialisation of the post war period . This form of nationalism came about in the post-war period .
 It was a reaction mainly in Africa and Asia against being subdued by foreign pov/ers . The reaction was mainly in Asia and Africa and Africa .
 Gandhi led by Gandhi in the Indian Terediet Ar/'cn/. argued that anti uw'viaiI uationaliSJu is groufiCicJ iri ti.c , Apci'ie.icc ot iiteruic ui.icc
 Critics of nationalism have argued that it is often unclear what constitutes a "nation" or why a nation should be the only legitimate unit of political rule . Critics argue that a nation is not a nation but a unit of power .
 A nation is a cultu'-al entity, not necessarily a political association, nor is it necessarily linked to i particular tenitorial area . A state should, as far as possible, coincide with a state, a nation is not necessarily political .
 He .irguf ih,. ""ti'ivcre is no country on eanh which is not home to more than one different but usual;, coexisting culture," he said .
 Tiv idea IS also potentialiy oppressive because h submerges individual identity within national wltole, and gives elites or political leaders potential oppoiluiiities to ntanipuiai or control the masses .
 Much of the early opposition to nationalism was related to geopolitical ideal of a separate state for every nation . Much oi' the opposition was to the idea of separate states for each nation . The early opposition was based on geopolitical ideal .
 The classic nationalist movemenoi the 19ih centuiy-' rejected the existence of the multi-ethnic empires in TurO'.-. liven m mat eany stage, ho w'ever, there was an ideoiogicai entique of nationalism has developed into several torn
 The revival of the 20th century also produced an Islamic critique of the nation-state . The . revival of 20th Century also produced a critique of Islamic statehood .
 Marxists and other socialists produced politics analysis that w'ere critical of nationalist movements then active in central and easic-n Europe were more sympathetic to national self-determination .
 In the liberal political tradition there is widespread criticism of'mationalism as a dangerous force and a cause of conflict and war between nation-states .
 Nationalism lias often been exploited to encourage citizens to partake in the nations’ conflicts . Nationalism is often used to encourage people to participate in the nation’s conflicts .
 nationalism was a key component of propaganda in the i vvo World Wars, where nationalism was key to propaganda .
 Liberals do not generally dispute the existence of the nation-states . Liberal critique also emphasizes individual tfeedorr!. as opposed to national identity, which IS by dexliution c jllective .
 The anti-racist critique of nationalism concentrates oq the attitudes to other nations, and especially on the doctrine that the nation-state exists for one national groun to the exclusion of others . Anti-racist theory of nationalism focuses on the attitudes of other nations .
 Norman Naimark relates the rise of nationalism to ethnic cleansing and genocide, including the Armenian Genocide, the Nazi Holocaust, the deportation of Chechens and Crimean Tartars under Stalin .
 Political movements of the left have often been suspicious of nationalism, again without necessarily seeking the disappearance of the existing nation-states . The left has often been skeptical of the idea of nationalism .
 Marxism has been ambiguous towards the nation-state, and in the late 19th century some Marxist theorists rejected it completely .
 For some Marxists the world revolution implied a global state . For others it meant that each nation-state had its own revolution . Some Marxists believed that the revolution was global .
 Social-democratic and socialist movements in Europe failed to mobilize a cross-border workers' opposition to World War I . At present most, but certainly not gll, left-wing groups accept the nation-state, and see it as the political aA-ena .
 Anafthlsm has developed a cntique of nationalism that focuses on its role in justifying and tOnsolidating state power and domination .
 Through its unifying goal it strives 'for -c^tfalization both in specific territories and in ruling elite of individuals while it prepares a fiOpulation for capitalist exploitation'
 The most comprehensive current ideological alternative to nationalism is cosmopolitanism . In the Western world, the most comprehensive ideological alternative is cosmogenicism . The subject has been treated extensively by Rudolf Rocker in Nationalism and Culture .
 It rejects such important nationalist values as national identity and national loyalty, it says . It rejects important national identity as national loyalty .
 Very few people openly and explicitly support the establishment of a global state, but political cosmopolitanism has influenced the development of international criminal law .
 nationalists are deeply suspicious of cosmopolitan attitudes, which they equate with eradication of diverse national cultures . In turn, nationalists are also deeply suspicious . They equate them with eradicating national cultures, they say .
 proletarian internationalism calls for the international working class to follow its brethren in other countries irrespective of the activities or pressures of the national government of a particular sector of that class .
 Most anarchists reject nation160 International Relations states on the basis of self-determination of the majority social class . Anarchists reject nationalism, and thus reject nationalism .
 Instead of nations, anarchists advocate the creation of cooperative societies based on free association and mutual aid without regard to ethnicity or race . Anarchists usually advocate free association based on mutual aid .
 Conflict resolution is a wide range of methods of addressing sources of conflict . Conflict resolution involves finding means of resolving a given conflict or of continuing it in less destructive forms than armed conflict .
 Processes of conflict resolution generally include negotiation, mediation, diplomacy and creative peace building . Processes are often followed by negotiation and mediation .
 The term ""conflict resolution" is sometimes used interchangeably with the terms dispute resolution or alternative dispute resolution . The term is used in reference to the terms conflict resolution and alternative resolution .
 The concept of conflict resolution can also encompass the use of non-violent methods such as civil resistance by a party to a conflict as a means of pursuing its goals . Such means are more likely than armed struggle to lead to effective resolution of the conflict .
 Conflict resolution as both a professional practice and academic field is highly sensitive to culture . Culture-based Conflict Resolution as both professionals and academics is sensitive to cultural sensitivity .
 Successful conflict resolution usually involves fostering communication among disputants, problem solving, and drafting agreements that meet their underlying needs . In Western cultural contexts, such as Canada and the U.S. successful conflict resolution involves drafting agreements to meet needs .
 Conflict resolvers often talk about finding a win-win solution, or mutually satisfying scenario, for eveiy'one involved . Getting to Yes is finding a mutually satisfying solution for both parties involved .
 In many non-Westem cultural contexts, such as Afghanistan, Vietnam, and China, it is also important to find ""win-win" solutions . However, getting there can be very different .
 Direct communication between disputants that explicitly addresses the issues at stake in the conflict can be perceived as rude, making the conflict worse and delaying resolution . In these contexts, direct communication can be seen as very rude .
 It can make sense to involve religious, tribal or community leaders, communicate difficult truths indirectly through a third party, and make suggestions through stories .
 Intercultural conflicts are often the most difficult to resolve because the expectations of the disputants can be very different, and there is much occasion for misunderstanding . Intercultural conflict is often the hardest to resolve as the expectations are very different .
 Aggression is more common among relatives and within a group than between groups . Aggressive is more likely to occur among relatives than within groups, experts say .
 The primates were more intimate in the period after the aggressive incident . Instead of creating a distance between the individuals, however, the primates were much more intimate .
 These intimacies consisted of grooming and various forms of body contact . The intimacies were groomed and made use of various methods of contact .
 Different types of primates, as well as many oth^r species living in groups, show different types of conciliatory behaviour .
 Resolving conflicts that threaten the interaction between individuals in a group is necessary for survival and hence has a strong evolutionaiy value . Resolving conflict is necessary to survive for a group's survival . Resolve conflicts necessary for the survival of a group in order to survive .
 These findings contradicted previous existing theories about the general function of aggression, i.e. creating space between individuals . This is more the case in conflicts between groups than it is within groups, according to the study .
 In addition to research in primates, biologists are beginning to explore reconciliation in other animals .
 Up until recently, the literature dealing with reconciliation in non-primates have consisted of anecdotal observations and very little quantitative data . Up until now, the research has been limited to anecdotal observations .
 Peaceful post-conflict behavior had been documented going back to the 1960s . It wasn't until 1993 that Rowell made the first explicit mention of reconciliation in feral sheep .
 Reconciliation has since been documented in spotted hyenas, lions, dolphins, dwarf mongoose, domestic goats, and domestic dogs .
 Conflict resolution is an expanding field of professional practice, both in the United States and around the world . Conflict resolution has become a growing field of practice in the U.S.
 The escalating costs of conflict have increased use of third parties who may serve as conflict specialists to resolve conflicts . Third parties may be able to use third parties as a conflict specialists .
 Relief and development organizations have added peace-building specialists to their teams . Peace-building experts have been added to relief organizations in recent years .
 Non-govemmental organizations have seen a growing need to hire practitioners trained in conflict analysis and resolution . Many of the major international Non-Govem mental organizations see a need for professional conflict analysis .
 Conflict resolution practitioners need to work in a variety of settings such as in businesses, court systems, government agencies, nonprofit organizations and government agencies . The expansion of the field has resulted in the need for conflict resolution practitioners .
 Education Universities worldwide offer programs of study pertaining to conflict research, analysis, and practice . Education universities offer programs in conflict research and analysis .
 Pax Ludens Foundation based in the Netherlands puts together conflict resolution simulations set in an International Relations scenario to help students learn about the intricacies of where conflict emerges in the world of international politics .
 Conflict resolution is a growing area of interest in UK pedagogy . Teachers and students are encouraged to learn about mechanisms that lead to aggressive action .
 Accommodation surrenders one's own needs and wishes to accunodate the other party . The word accommodation is surrendering your own needs to accommodate others .
 Avoidance avoid or postpone conflict by ignoring or postponing it by ignoring it, changing the subject, etc. Avoidance avoids conflict by avoiding it, ignoring it or changing it . Avoidance is a form of avoidance by avoiding conflict, avoiding it by changing the topic or avoiding it .
 Avoidance can be useful as a temporary measure to buy time or as an expedient means of dealing with very minor, non-recurring conflicts . Avoidance is a way of avoiding conflicts, but it can also be useful in dealing with minor problems, experts say .
 Conflict avoidance can involve severing a relationship or leaving a group . In more severe c^ses, conflict avoidance may involve leaving a relationship . Conflict avoidance involves severing, leaving or severing relationships .
 Thomas-Kilmann grid views collaboration as the only win-win solution to conflict . Collaboration can also be time-intensive and inappropriate w'hen there is not enough trust, respect or communication among participants .
 Compromise bring the problem into the open and have the third person present . Compromize bring the issue to the open, have the other person present, say CNN.com .
 The aim of conflict resolution is to reach agreement and most often this will mean compromise . Conflict resolution is the aim of finding a solution to the problems of conflict .
 Competition asserts one's viewpoint at the potential expense of another . Competition assert one's view at the expense of one's .
 It can be useful when achieving one's objectives outweighs one's concern for the relationship . It can help when achieving objectives outweigh the concern for your relationship .
 The Thomas Kilmann Instrument can be used to assess one's dominant style for addressing conflict . The Kilmann instrument is a tool that can assess a dominant style of dealing with conflict .
 Conflict management refers to the long-term management of intractable conflicts . Conflict management is a management term used to deal with intractible conflicts .
 It is the label for the variety of ways by which people handle grievances . People stand up for what they consider to be right and against what they think to be wrong .
 "Gossip, ridicule, lynching, terrorism, warfare, feuding, genocide, law, mediation, and avoidance" are some of the world's most famous ways of dealing with these phenomena .
 Which forms of conflict management will be used in any given situation can be somewhat predicted and explained by the social sti'ucturc—or social geometry—of the case .
 Conflict management is often considered to be distinct from conflict resolution . Conflict management can be seen as a form of conflict management . Conflict resolution is a key part of the conflict management process .
 In order for actual conflict to occur, there should be an expression of exclusive patterns, and tell why the conflict was expressed the way it was . The conflict should be expressed in exclusive patterns and told why it was expressed .
 Conflict is not just about simple inaptness, but is often connected to a previous issue . Conflict is often not simple, but connected to previous issues . Conflict can be resolved in a long time, even if it's not simple .
 The latter refers to resolving the dispute to the approval of one or both parties, whereas the former concerns an ongoing process that may never have a resolution .
 Neither is considered the same as conflict ‘ransformation, which seeks to reframe the positions of the conflict parties . Neither is the same . as conflict 'ransformation’
 Personal conflict leads to frustration and loss of efficiency . Counseling may prove to be a helpful antidote to this frustration .
 Given some training, managers may be able to perform this function, given some training . Few organizations can afford to afford the luxury of having professional counselors on staff .
 Nondirective counseling, or ""listening with understanding"", is little more than being a good listener . Being a good manager is something every manager should be. It's something that managers should be .
 Sometimes the simple nrocess of being able to vent one's feelings is enough to relieve frustration, relieve frustration and make it possible for the frustrated individual to advance to a problem-solving frame of mind, better able to .
 There are other more direct and more diagnostic ways that might be used in appropriate circumstances . There is no need to use the 'diagnosis tool' to diagnose a child's condition, doctors say .
 The great strength of the nondirective approach lies in its simplicity, its effectiveness, and its effectiveness . It deliberately avoids the managercounselor's diagnosing and interpreting emotional problems, which would call for special psychological training .
 Listening to staff with sympathy and understanding is unlikely to escalate the problem . It is a widely used approach for helping people cope with problems that interfere with their effectiveness in their place of work .
 NATO was established by the signing of the North Atlantic Treaty on 4 April 1949 . NATO is a military alliance based in North America and Europe . NATO was formed in 1949 .
 The Organization constitutes a system of collective defense in which its member states agree to mutual defense in response to an attack by any external party . Headquartered in Brussels, Belgium, the organization is headquartered in Brussels .
 NATO was not much more than a political association in its first few years . NATO was founded in 1950s, but it has since emerged as a major alliance in Europe .
 The Korean War galvanized the member states, and an integrated militar>' structure was built up under the direction of the U.S. supreme commanders .
 Doubts over the strength of the relationship between the European states and the U.S. ebbed and flowed throughout the Cold War . The French withdrawal of the French from NATO's military structure from 1966 .
 After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, the organization became drawn into the Balkans while building better links with former potential enemies to the east . The former Warsaw Pact states—except Albania—joined the alliance in 1999 and 2004 .
 NATO has deployed troops to Afghanistan and trainers to Iraq . Since the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, NATO has attempted to refocus itself to new challenges .
 Treaty of Brussels was signed on March 17, 1948 by Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France and the United Kingdom . The treaty and the Soviet Berlin Blockade led to the creation of the Western European Union's Defense Organization in September 1948 .
 Talks for a new military alliance began almost immediately . Participation of the United States was thought necessary in order to counter the military power of the USSR .
 It included the five Treaty of Brussels states, as well as the U.S., Canada, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark and Iceland . The treaty was signed by the United States and Canada .
 Iceland suffered an anti-NATO riot in March 1949 which may have been Communist-inspired . Support for the Treaty was not unanimous; Iceland suffered a riot in 1949 .
 Such action as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force does not necessarily mean that other member states will respond with military action against the aggressors . Such action is not necessarily necessarily that other members of the U.S. will respond to it .
 Rather than respond, they are obliged to respond, but maintain the freedom to choose how they will respond . Rather they must respond, rather than respond to them, they must choose how to respond .
 Article IV of the Treaty of Brussels states that the response must include military action . Article IV states that military action must be carried out in response to the situation . Article 4 states that a response must be military action, but Article IV does not state that this must be done .
 NATO often assumed that NATO members will aid the attacked member militarily . It is not always assumed NATO will assist in the fight against an attacked member .
 The article limits NATO's scope to Europe and North America . It explains why the invasion of the British Falkland Islands did not result in NATO involvement .
 The outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 was crucial for NATO as it raised the apparent threat level greatly and forced the alliance to develop concrete military plans . The outbreak in 1950 raised the threat level significantly and forced NATO to develop plans .
 The 1952 Lisbon conference sought to provide the forces necessary for NATO's LongTerm Defense Plan . The 1952 conference called for an expansion to 96 divisions . NATO plans to expand the number of divisions .
 This requirement was dropped the following year to roughly 35 divisions with heavier use to be made of nuclear weapons . However, this requirement was later dropped to about 35 divisions . The requirement was then dropped .
 NATO could call on about 15 ready divisions in Central Europe, and another ten in Italy and Scandinavia . At this time of this time, NATO could have about 15 . divisions in central Europe .
 Also at Lisbon, the post of Secretary General of NATO as the organization's chief civilian was also created . Baron Hastings Ismay was eventually appointed to the post .
 NATO was preparing for a successful Soviet invasion of the Soviet Union in the 1980s . Plans to continue resistance after a successful invasion were being transferred to NATO control .
 Unofficial bonds began to grow between NATO's armed forces . NATO Tiger Association and competitions such as the Canadian Army Trophy for tank gunnery .
 The incorporation of West Germany into the organization on May 9, 1955 was described as ""a decisive turning point in the history of our continent"" by Halvard Lange, Foreign Minister of Norway .
 The creation of the Warsaw Pact, signed on May 14, 1955 by the Soviet Union, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, and Albania . The Warsaw Pact was a formal response to this event, and delineated the two opposing sides of the Cold War
 The unity of NATO was breached early on in its history, with a crisis occurring during Charles de Gaulle's presidency of France from 1958 onward . The crisis occurred during the French presidency from 1958 onwards .
 De Gaulle protested the United States' strong role in the organization and what he perceived as a special relationship between the U.S. and the United Kingdom .
 Eisenhower argued for the creation of a tripartite directorate that would put France on an equal footing with the United States and the United Kingdom . He argued for expansion of NATO's coverage to include geographical areas of interest to France, most notably Algeria .
 On 11 March 1959, France withdrew its Mediterranean fleet from NATO command . Three months later, de Gaulle banned the stationing of foreign nuclear weapons on French soil .
 The U.S. transferred two hundred military aircraft out of France and returned control of the ten major air force bases that had operated in France since 1950 to the French by 1967 . This caused the United States to transfer two hundred aircraft .
 France tested its first nuclear weapon, Gerboise Bleue, on February 13, 1960, in French Algeria . France tested the weapon in 1960 in Algeria, Algeria .
 de Gaulle removed France's Atlantic and Channel fleets from NATO command in 1962 . France showed solidarity with the rest of NATO during the Cuban missile crisis . De Gaulle continued his pursuit of an independent defence .
 In 1966, all French armed forces were removed from NATO's integrated military command, and all non-French NATO troops were asked to leave France . The French armed force was removed from the command of NATO in 1966 .
 The Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe was relocated from Paris to Casteau, north of Mons, Belgium, by October 16, 1967 . This withdrawal forced the relocation of the Supreme Headquarters of the Allied Powers . Europe from Paris was forced to relocate .
 France remained a member of the alliance, and committed to the defense of Europe from possible Communist attack with its own forces stationed in the Federal Republic of Germany throughout this period . The French government remained committed to Europe's defense, and remained a part of the NATO alliance .
 France rejoined NATO's Military Committee in 1995, and has since intensified working relations with the military structure . France has worked closely with NATO since joining in 1995 .
 France has not, however, rejoined the integrated military command and no non-French NATO troops are allowed to be based on its soil . France has still not rejoined NATO's integrated command .
 The policies of current French President Nicolas Sarkozy appear to be aimed at eventual re-integration . Sarkozy appears to be trying to rebuild the French-Muslim community .
 NATO brought about some standardization of allied military terminology, procedures, and technology . European countries adopted United States practices . NATO has been a major source of cooperation with the United States .
 The roughly l-,300 Standardization Agreemeiits codifies the standardization that NATO has achieved . NATO has reached a roughly l-300 standardization standardization .
 Fabrique Nationale's FAL became the most popular 7.62 NATO rifle in Europe and served into the early 1990s . The FAL was the first rifle to be produced in Europe's most successful rifle rifle .
 Aircraft marshalling signals were standardized, so that any NATO aircraft could land at any NATO base . NATO aircraft were able to land at NATO bases .
 NATO phonetic alphabet has made its way beyond NATO into civilian use . Other standards such as NATO phonetics alphabet have also been adopted by the U.S.
 NATO maintained a holding pattern with no actual military engagement as an organization . During most of the duration of the Cold War, NATO was in a quiet holding pattern . NATO has been criticized for being too cozy with Russia .
 NATO argued that its nuclear weapons sharing arrangements did not breach the treaty as United States fomes controlled the weapons until a decision was made to go to war, at which point the treaty would no longer be controlling . NATO said the treaty does not breach because the U.S. fomes
 Few states knew of NATO nuclear sharing arrangements at that time, and they were not challenged . Few states were aware of the arrangements at the time .
 NATO countries officially defined two complementary aims of the Alliance, to maintain security and pursue detente . On May 30, 1978, NATO countries . NATO countries agreed to meet the two goals of maintaining security and pursuing detente in the 1970s .
 This was supposed to mean matching defenses at the level rendered necessary by the Warsaw Pact's offensive capabilities without spurring a further arms race . The Warsaw Pact was meant to match the level of defense needed by the Soviet Union .
 On December 12, 1979, ministers approved the deployment of GLCM cruise missiles and Pershing II theater nuclear weapons in Europe . The move was in light of a build-up of Warsaw Pact nuclear capabilities in Europe, ministers said .
 The new warheads were also meant to strengthen the western negotiating position in regard to nuclear disarmament . New warheads were intended to strengthen Western negotiating position .
 NATO responded to the stationing of Warsaw Pact SS-20 medium-range missiles in Europe . NATO deployed modem Pershing II missiles tasked to hit military targets such as tank formations in the event of war .
 These missiles were theater nuclear weapons intended to strike targets on the battlefield if the Soviets invaded West Germany . The missiles were intended to hit targets in West Germany if the Soviet Union invaded .
 Support for the deployment was wavering and many doubted whether the push for deployment could be sustained . Yet, support for the deploys has been waned .
 The Soviet Union shot down a Korean airliner, loaded with passengers, when it crossed into Soviet airspace . President Reagan characterized the shooting as a massacre . Reagan characterized it as 'a massacre'
 The barbarity of this act, as the United States and the world understood it, galvanized support for the deployment . It stood in place until the later accords between Reagan and Mikhael Gorbachev .
 The membership of the organization in this time period remained largely static . This time period was largely the same period .
 In 1974, as a consequence of the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, Greece withdrew its forces from NATO's military command structure . In 1980, with Turkish cooperation, Greece was readmitted in 1980 .
 On May 30, 1982, NATO gained a new member when, following a referendum, the newly democratic Spain joined the alliance . Spain joined NATO in 1982 after a referendum .
 NATO manoeuvres simulating a nuclear launch caused panic in the Kremlin in 1983 . In November 1983, Nato manoeuvres simulated a nuclear strike in Moscow caused panic .
 In response, Soviet nuclear forces were readied and air units in East Germany and Poland placed on alert . In response to Soviet forces being readied, Soviet forces were also readied . Air units in Poland and East Germany were placed on .
 Many historians now believe that the Soviet fear of a NATO first strike was genuine . Though at the time written off by U S intelligence as a propaganda effoit, many historians now think that the fears were genuine .
 NATO re-evaluation of NATO's purpose, nature and tasks . NATO has been criticized for its role in Afghanistan as a major ally in the region .
 NATO expanded its activities to areas that had not formerly been NATO concerns . In practice this ended up entailing a gradual expansion of NATO to Eastern Europe .
 The first post-Cold War expansion of NATO came with the reunification of Germany on October 3, 1990, when the former East Germany became part of the Federal Republic of Germany and the alliance . NATO has expanded since the end of the Cold War .
 To secure Soviet approval of a united Germany remaining in NATO, it was agreed that foreign troops and nuclear weapons would not be stationed in the east . The agreement was made in order to secure approval of the union from the Soviet Union .
 On May 7, 2008, The Daily Telegraph held an interview with Gorbachev in which he repeated his vievievv that such a commitment had been made .
 NATO's military structure was cut back and reorganized as part of post-Cold War restructuring . New forces such as the Headquarters Allied Command Europe Rapid Reaction Corps were established .
 The Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe agreed between NATO and the Warsaw Pact and signed in Paris in 1990, mandated specific reductions . NATO and Warsaw Pact agreed in 1990 to reduce the number of troops in Europe .
 The changes brought about by the collapse of the Soviet Union on the military balance in Europe were recognized in the Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty, signed some years later .
 Operation Sharp Guard was the first NATO military operation caused by the conflict in the former Yugoslavia . It ran from June 1993-October 1996 . The first NATO operation was called Sharp Guard .
 It provided maritime enforcement of the arms embargo and economic sanctions against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . The U.S. helped enforce an arms embargo against Yugoslavia .
 NATO shot down four Bosnian Serb aircraft violating a U.N.-mandated no-fly zone over central Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1994 . Operation Deny Flight had begun a year before, on April 12, 1993, and was to continue until December 20, 1995
 NATO air strikes that year helped bring the war in Bosnia to an end, resulting in the Dayton Agreement . Operation Joint Endeavor was first named IFOR and then SFOR, which ran from December 1996 to December 2004 .
 NATO began to award a service medal, the NATO Medal, for these operations . NATO began the lead of its member nations to award the medal .
 On 8 July 1997, three former communist countries, Hungaiy, the Czech Republic, and Poland, were invited to join NATO, which fiftally happened in 1999 . The Czech Republic and Poland joined NATO in July 1997 .
 Operation Deliberate Force began in August, 1995, against the Army of Republika Srpska, after the Srebrenica massacre . A NATO bombing campaign began against the army in August 1995 after the massacre of Srebranica .
 NATO saw its first broad-scale military engagement in the Kosovo War in 1999 . NATO waged an 11-week bombing campaign against what was then Yugoslavia,*in an effort to stop ethnic cleansing .
 The conflict ended on 11 June 1999, when Yugoslavian leader Slobodan Milo_evi_ agreed to NATO’s demands by accepting UN resolution 1244 . The conflict was the first Yugoslavia to agree to NATO's demands .
 NATO deployed one of its international reaction forces, the ACE Mobile Force, to Albania as the Albania Force . During the crisis, NATO also deployed a similar force to deliver humanitarian aid to refugees from Kosovo .
 NATO helped establish KFOR, a NATO-led force under a U.N. mandate that operated the military mission in Kosovo . NATO then helped establish the KFOR .
 In AugustSeptember 2001, the alliance also mounted Operation Essential Harvest . The mission disarmed ethnic Albanian militias in the Republic of Macedonia .
 The United States, the United Kingdom, and most other NATO countries opposed efforts to require the United Nations Security Council to approve NATO militaiy strikes . France and some others claimed that the alliance needed United Nations approval .
 The September 11 attacks caused NATO to invoke Article 5 of the NATO Charter for the first time in its history . NATO invoked Article 5 after the 9/11 attacks in September 2001 .
 An attack on any member shall be considered to be an attack on all, Article says . Article says that an attack . shall be seen to be considered a . attack on . any member of the party .
 The invocation was confirmed on 4 October 2001 when NATO determined that the attacks were indeed eligible under the terms of the North Atlantic Treaty . NATO determined in October 2001 that the 9/11 attacks were eligible under NATO's terms .
 NATO has taken eight official actions in response to the attacks . Operation Eagle Assist and Operation Active Endeavour were two of the eight official responses to the attack .
 Operation Active Endeavour is a naval operation in the Mediterranean Sea . It is designed to prevent the movement of terrorists or weapons of mass destruction . The operation aims to enhance the security of shipping in general .
 France and Belgium vetoed the procedure of silent approval concerning the timing of protective measures for Turkey in case of a possible war with Iraq in 2003 . Belgium and France vetoed a similar procedure on February 10, 2003, when Turkey and Iraq were at risk of war .
 Germany did not use its right to break the procedure but said it supported the veto . Germany said it did not break procedure but supported veto of the vote .
 NATO agreed to take command of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan in 2003 . On April 16, 2003 NATO took command in charge of the IAF in Afghanistan . On the issue of Afghanistan, the alliance showed greater unity .
 The decision came at the request of Germany and the Netherlands, the two nations leading ISAF at the time of the agreement . All 19 NATO ambassadors approved it unanimously .
 The handover of control to NATO took place on August 1 h, and marked the first time in NATO’s history that it took charge of a mission outside the north Atlantic area . NATO took control of the mission in the early months of August .
 NATO appointed Hikmet Qetin, of Turkey, as the Senior Civilian Representative in Afghanistan, in January 2004 . Canada had originally been slated to take over ISAF by itself .
 Minister Cetin is responsible for advancing the political-military aspects of the Alliance in Afghanistan . He is primarily responsible .
 NATO-led force took over military operations in the south of Afghanistan from U.S.-led coalition in 2006 . NATO force is made up mostly of troops from Canada, Great Britain, Turkey and the Netherlands .
 NATO Response Force was launched at the 2002 Prague Summit on November 21 . NATO Response force was launched in November 21, 2002 .
 On June 19, 2003, a major restructuring of the NATO military commands began . Headquarters of the Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic were abolished .
 ACT is responsible for driving transformation in NATO, while ACO is driving current operations . ACT and ACO are responsible for current operations in NATO . ACT is also responsible for the NATO mission in Afghanistan .
 Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania join seven more Northern European and Eastern European countries to NATO . Membership went on expanding with the accession of seven more Eastern and Northern European countries . Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania also join NATO .
 NATO began talks of membership in 2002 Prague Summit . They were first invited to start talks during the 2002 Prague summit . NATO joined NATO in 2004, shortly before the 2004 Istanbul Summit . NATO membership was first invited in Prague in 2002 .
 The same month, NATO's Baltic Air Policing began, which supported the sovereignty of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia by providing fighters to react to any unwanted aerial intrusions .
 Four fighters are based in Lithuania, provided in rotation by virtually all the NATO states . NATO states provide four fighters in a rotation .
 Operation Peaceful Summit temporarily enhanced this patrolling during the 2006 Riga Summit . Operation peaceful Summit increased patrols during the Riga summit .
 The 2006 NATO summit was held in Riga, Latvia, which had joined the Atlantic Alliance two years earlier . Latvia joined the NATO alliance in 2006 .
 At the April 2008 summit in Bucharest, Romania, NATO agreed to the accession of Croatia and Albania . Albania and Croatia were invited to join NATO in 2008 .
 NATO assumed control of ISAF in Afghanistan in August 2003 . ISAF is NATO's first mission ever outside Europe . NATO has been involved in Afghanistan since 2003 .
 Many NATO countries with troops in Afghanistan have 'national caveats' that restrict how their troops may be used . For instance, political scientist Joseph Nye stated in a 2006 article that many NATO countries have "national caveats"
 Britain, Canada, the Netherlands, and the U.S. are doing most of the fighting in southern Afghanistan . French, German, and Italian troops are deployed in the quieter north .
 France has recently allowed a squadron of Mirage 2000 fighter/attack aircraft to be moved into the area, to Khandahar, in order to reinforce the alliance's efforts .
 If these caveats were to be eliminated, it is argued that this could help NATO to succeed . It's argued that it would help NATO succeed if it were eliminated .
 The United States negotiated with Poland and the Czech Republic for the deployment of interceptor missiles and a radar tracking system in the two countries . The U.S. negotiated with the countries for some years, the United States says .
 Both countries indicated that they would allow the deployment . Both countries' governments indicated that the deployment would be OKed .
 The proposed American missile defense site in Central Europe is believed to be fully operational in 2015 . The site would be capable of covering most of Europe except part of Romania, Bulgaria, Greece and Turkey .
 NATO's decision-making North Atlantic Council held consultations on missile defense in the first meeting on the topic at such a senior level . NATO's European allies called for a NATO missile defense system which would complement the American National Missile Defense system .
 Russian president Vladimir Putin claimed that such a deployment could lead to a new arms race . Putin also said that such an arms race could enhance the likelihood of mutual destruction . Russia's president said the deployment could increase the risk of war .
 He also suggested that his country' should freeze compliance with the 1990 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe until all NATO countries had ratified the adapted CFE treaty .
 Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said the system would not affect strategic balance or threaten Russia . Plan is to base only 10 interceptor missiles in Poland with an associated radar in the Czech Republic .
 Potential future members include the Republic of Macedonia/former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia . The Republic was under consideration to ent^er NATO in 2009 .
 Other potential candidate countries include Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia . Other potential candidates are Montenegro and Montenegro .
 Finland and Sweden might become members of the group . Other possible members might include Finland, Sweden and Finland .
 NATO's expansion policy is seen by Russia as a continuation of a Cold War attempt to surround and isolate Russia . NATO's NATO expansion policy has been criticized by Russia for being seen as an attempt to isolate Russia.
 NATO began in an attempt to thwart feared Communist expansionism, and despite the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, the relationship between Russia and NATO still remains problemaiic . NATO was formed in response to fears of Soviet-Russian expansionism .
 Warsaw Pact was a mutual defense treaty subscribed to by communist states in Eastern Europe . The Warsaw Treaty Organization of Friendship, Cooperation, and Mutual Assistance was the Warsaw Pact .
 It was established at the Soviet Union's initiative and realized on 14 May 1955, in Warsavv. It was set up in the USSR in 1955 .
 In the Communist Bloc, the treaty was the military analogue of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance . The treaty was a military analogue to the communist European economic community .
 The Warsaw Pact was the Soviet Bloc's military response to West Germany’s May 1955 integration to the NATO Pact, per the Paris Pacts of 1954 . West Germany's integration to NATO Pact was part of the Warsaw Pact .
 Although ostensibly an international collective security alliance, the USSR dominated the Warsaw Treaty armed forces . Therefore, although ostensibly . ostensibly . a collective security . alliance, it was dominated by the USSR . The Warsaw Treaty was formed in 1953 .
 The strategy of the Warsaw Pact was dominated by the desire to prevent, at all costs, an invasion of Russian soil as had occurred under Napoleon in 1812 and Hitler in 1941-44 . The USSR emerged from the Second World War with the greatest total losses in life of any participant in
 It was dominated by the Marxist-Leninist teaching that one way or the other, socialism ultimately had to prevail, which was taken to mean even in a nuclear war . It was also taught that even in nuclear war, socialism would prevail .
 The USSR established the Warsaw Pact in response to the integration of the Federal Republic of Germany into NATO in October 1954 only nine years after the defeat of Naz* Germany that ended only with the Soviet and Allied invasion of Germany in 1944/45 during World War 11 .
 The reality was that a ""Warsaw""-type pact had been in existence since 1945, when Soviet forces were initially in occupation of Eastern Europe, and maintained there after the war .
 The Warsaw Pact pledged the mutual defense of any member who would be attacked . Relations were based upon mutual non-intervention in the internal affairs of the member countries, respect for national sovereignty, and political independence .
 NATO and the Warsaw Treaty never directly waged war against each other in Europe . The United States and the Soviet Union and their respective allies implemented strategic policies aimed at the containment of each other . NATO and its allies fought for influence within the wider Cold War on the international stage .
 Soviet troops entered Hungary in 1956, following the declaration of the Imre Nagy government of withdrawal of Hungary from the Warsaw Pact . Soviet troops removed the government in Hungary following Nagy's declaration of withdrawal from the Pact .
 The multi-national Communist armed forces’ sole joint action was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 . The Warsaw Pact invaded Czech Czechoslovakia in August 1968.
 All member countries, with the exception of the Socialist Republic of Romania and the People's Republic of Albania, participated in the invasion . The invasion was the first invasion of the Soviet Union .
 Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Albania, East Germany, Poland, Romania, Romania and Bulgaria deposed their Communist governments in the period from 198991 .
 In November 2005, the Polish government opened its Warsaw Treaty archives to the Institute of National Remembrance . In January 2006, 1,300 declassified documents were published in Poland .
 Seven Days to the River Rhine is a short, swift attack capturing Western Europe, using nuclear weapons, in self-defense, after a NATO first strike .
 Seven Days to the River Rhine gave commanders few defensive-war strategies for fighting NATO in Warsaw Treaty territory . Seven days to the river Rhine was one of the most memorable days of the war .
 The Southeast Asia Treaty Organization was an international organization for collective defense in Southeast Asia . It was created by the Manila Pact, signed in September 1954 in Manila, Philippines .
 The formal institution of SEATO was established on 19 February 1955 at a meeting of treaty partners in Bangkok, Thailand . SEATo was established at a treaty meeting in Bangkok in 1955 .
 SEATO was created to block further communist gains in Southeast Asia . The organization was largely considered a failure because internal conflict and dispute hindered general use of the military . However, the organization's cultural and educational programs left long-standing effects in Asia .
 SEATO was dissolved on 30 June 1977 after multiple members lost interest and withdrew . SEATo was dissolved in 1977 after members of the organization withdrew .
 SEATO was created by the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, or Manila Pact, signed oh 8 September 1954 in Manila, as part of the U.S. Truman Doctrine of creating anti-communist bilateral and collective defense treaties . The treaty was signed in Manila in September 1954 .
 Kennan's policy was largely developed by American diplomat and Soviet expert George F Kennan . This policy was considered to have been developed by Kennan in the 1960s .
 SEATO was planned to be a Southeast Asian version of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The military forces of each member would be coordinated to provide for the collective defense of the members' country . The organization would be based in Southeast Asia .
 SEATO was headed by the Secretary General, whose office was created in 1957 at a meeting in Canberra, with a council of representatives from member nations and an international staff . The Secretary General's office was also set up in 1957 .
 Pole Sarasin served as Thailand's ambassador to the U.S. between 1952 and 1957 . He was Thailand's Prime Minister of Thailand from September 1957 to January 1958 .
 SEATO had no joint commands with standing forces . Unlike the NATO alliance, SEATo did not have joint command posts . Unlike NATO, the organization had no standing forces in the country .
 SEATO's members included Australia, France, New Zealand, Pakistan, Pakistan and the Philippines, Thailand, the United Kingdom, and the United States .
 The membership reflected a mid-1950s combination of anti-communist Western nations and such nations in Southeast Asia . The membership of the group reflected a mixture of Western nations with Southeast Asia nations .
 The United Kingdom, Australia and the United States joined after the Senate ratified the treaty by a 82-1 vote . The U.K., Australia and U.S. represented the strongest Western powers in the world .
 South Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos were not SEATO members . Because of the 1954 Geneva Conference settling the First Indochina War (19461954), they were not members .
 They were, however, granted military protection, though Cambodia rejected the protection in 1956 . They were given military protection in the 1950s, but Cambodia rejected it .
 Canada considered joining, but decided against it in order to concentrate on its NATO responsibilities . The country considered joining but decided not to .
 SEATO quickly became insignificant militarily, as most of its member nations contLbuted very little to the alliance .
 SEATO military forces held joint military training, but were never employed because of internal disagreements . SEATo military forces never employed due to internal disagreements over training .
 SEATO was unable to intervene in conflicts in Laos because France and Britain rejected use of military action . France and the UK rejected using military action in the country .
 The U.S. provided unilateral support for Laos after 1962 . As a result, the United States provided support for the government of Laos .
 SEATO's involvement in Vietnam War was denied because of lack of British and French cooperation . U.S. sought by U.K. but was denied due to lack of cooperation from French and British forces .
 American membership in SEATO provided the United States with a rationale for a large-scale U.S. military intervention in Southeast Asia . The United States joined the organization in 1973 .
 Other countries, such as Great Britain, accepted the rationale . Great Britain and key nations in Asia accepted it .
 SEATO member states worked together to improve mutual social and economic issues . The group also worked on improving mutual social, economic and military training .
 SEATO's Committee of Information, Culture, Education, and Labor Activities oversaw some of the organization's greatest successes . The Committee's activities were overseen by the committee of information, culture, education and labor activities .
 In 1959, SEATO's first Secretary General, Pote Sarasin, created a Graduate School of Engineering in Thailand to train engineers . The Asian Institute of Technology is currently located in Thailand .
 SEATO also sponsored the creation of the Teacher Development Center in Bangkok . The Thai Military Technical Training School offered technical training programs for supervisors and workmen .
 SEATO's Skilled Labor Project created artisan training facilities, especially in Thailand . Ninety-one training workshops were established in Thailand, where ninety-one workshops were set up .
 SEATO also pro\dded research funding and grants in agriculture and medical fields . The organization also pro-succeeds research funding in agriculture, medical and agriculture fields .
 SEATO set up the Cholera Research Laboratory in Bangkok in 1959, later establishing a second in Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 1959 . The company set up a second laboratory in Bangkok and Dhaka in Bangladesh .
 The Dhaka laboratory soon became the world's leading choleraresearch facility . It was later renamed the International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research .
 SEATO was also interested in literature, and a Literature Award was created and given to writers from member states . The award was created to be given to members of the organisation .
 Historians have considered the Manila Pact a failure and the pact is rarely mentioned in history books . Secretary of State Dulles considered SEATO an essential element in American foreign policy .
 Pakistan withdrew in the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971 . East Pakistan successfully seceded with the aid of India . Pakistan withdrew from Bangladesh in the aftermath of the war .
 After a final exercise on 20 February 1976, the orgrnization was formally dissolved in 1977 .
 Central Treaty Organization was adopted m 1955 by Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Turkc)', and the United Kingdom . The Central Treaty Organisation was adopted by Iran and Iraq .
 In 1958, the United States joined the mi'itar>' committee of the alliance . The U.S. joined the committee in 1958 .
 It is generally viewed as one of the least succesful alliances of the Cold War . The alliance was a Cold War effort that failed to achieve success in the war .
 The organization's headquarters were initially located in Bagndad 1955-1958 and Ankara 1958-1979 . The organization was based in Ankara, Turkey, until 1979 .
 CENTO was modeled after the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . CENTO committed nations to mutual cooperation and protection, as well as non-intervention in each other's affairs .
 Its goal was to contain the Soviet Union by having a line of strong states along the USSR's southwestern frontier . The U.S. wanted to contain Russia by having strong states on its southwestern border .
 It was known as the ■Northern Tier' to prevent Soviet expansion into the Middle East . Similarly, it was also known to stop Soviet expansion in the region .
 CENTO did not have a unified military command structure, nor were many U.S. or UK military bases established in member countries . The United States had communications and electronic intelligence facilities in Iran, and operated U-2 intelligence flights over the USSR from bases in Pakistan .
 The United Kingdom had access to facilities in Pakistan and Iraq at various times while the treaty was in effect . The treaty was between the UK and the U.S.
 On July 14, 1958, the Iraqi monarchy was overthrown in a military coup . Iraq's prime minister was assassinated in the wake of a coup in 1958 .
 The new government was led by General Abdul Karim Qasim who withdrew from the Baghdad Pact, opened diplomatic relations with Soviet Union and adopted a non-aligned stance . Iraq quit the organization shortly thereafter .
 The organization dropped the name 'Baghdad Pact' in favor of'CENTO' at that time . The organization was renamed CENTO at the time .
 The Middle East and South Asia became extremely volatile areas during the 1960s with the ongoing Arab-Israeli Conflict and the Indo-Pakistani Wars . The region was extremely volatile during that period .
 In 1965 and 1971, Pakistan tried unsuccessfully to get assistance in its wars with India through CENTO . This was rejected under the idea that CENTO was aimed at containing the USSR, not India .
 CENTO did little to prevent the expansion of Soviet influence to non-member states in the area, CENTO says . CENTO failed to prevent Soviet influence in the region, leaving CENTO with little oversight of the Soviet Union .
 The pact was lost when the Soviets 'leap-frogged' the member states, establishing close military and political relationships with governments in Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Yemen, and Libya .
 Yemen. /herf^ ( r^cjjhtion spelled the end of the organization m 1979, but in reality, it . had MeA»j^ni5h^,^ce 1974, when Turkey invaded Cyprus .
 The Unite4Kiri^m had earmarked aid to the Unif|i^^^^Congress halted*Tar*Tar^iklj^lSitary aid despite two Presidential vetoes . This led the Unite 4Kiri’m to withdraw funds earmarked for
 With thel^^lF^^anian monarchy, v^tev/r remaining rationale for the organization was lost . With the loss of the monarchy, the remaining rationale was lost for the monarchy .
 Butuf® gBritish eftj^se .agreements with regional countries — such as Pakistan — were conducted bilaterally .