 Many of the original participants in the ""Thirteen Days in October" wish to demon strate fairness and balanced judgment about the Soviet Union, de ferring politely to officials .
 "One thing is clear to me, one of the aging participants who remembers the 1962 crisis pretty clearly," he says . One thing to be clear to him, he says, is that he remembers the crisis in 1962 clearly .
 Mikhail Gorbachev's team of official intellectuals is engaged in a program of historical revision ism serving Moscow's interest . Mikhail Gorbaev's team, official intellectuals, are engaged in an attempt to revise history, writes Peter Bergen .
 Some of the facts being laid out are misleading or simply not true . The geopolitical thrust of the Soviet interpretation of history is false, says CNN.com .
 Political jokes in Moscow are very revealing, and one joke of some durability tells us something about Cuba of 1962 . The joke is one of the most enduring political jokes in the world .
 Marxist-Leninist states give a clear, simple picture of the future, bound to be bright for communism, but the past is unpredictable since it needs to be changed from time to time . The story goes that Marxist- Leninist states .
 The past has certainly changed under Gorbachev, who is purging Brezhnev-era cohorts but energetically refurbishing the image of Lenin and that good old economic reformer Nikita Khrushchev .
 It is not necessary, however, for Americans to believe everything they are told or to forget what they thought they knew . It's not necessary to forget everything you thought you knew, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Many of the Americans attending the symposium, including former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and former Assistant to the President for National Se curity Affairs McGeorge Bundy, accepted that Khrushchev may have acted defensively .
 They seemed rather to like the romantic idea that the two superpowers were at the very brink of war, as Gorbachev urged them to believe . They seemed to be rather than like the idea that they were at war .
 The truth is that both sides were scrupulous in avoiding even the remote chance of an actual nuclear exchange . The United States had at least a four-to-one advantage in icbms and nuclear weapons capability, as well as a much greater number of bomber aircraft .
 None of the informed officials I talked with at the time thought the chances of war were high . While it is exciting to speculate on how brilliantly we escaped the nuclear holocaust, none of the . officials thought the chance of war was high .
 Had it been otherwise, the direct threat of nuclear retaliation would have been hedged . President's October 22 warning was drafted by others for the president's warning .
 Our superiority was so great that only a mad Khrushchev would have fired a nuclear weapon, he says . Our superiority would have been so great, he adds, only a 'mad Khrush' would have used a nuke .
 We knew enough about him to believe he was wily, secretive and deceptive, but not blind to his own and his country's security . He was a wily and secretive, secretive, deceptive, deceptive leader .
 Khrushchev's son has indicated that the Soviet leader kept him on a tight rein . Castro might have been tempted, as was suggested at the symposium, but he was not tempted .
 Soviet participants suggested that Cuban missiles were ready to be armed with nuclear warheads, which would have heightened the danger of war . One piece of suspect evidence presented in Moscow was the suggestion from Soviet participants .
 A Soviet military historian, General Dmitri A Volkogonov, said he had ""reviewed archive material on the subject,"" although he did not present confirming evidence of his deduction that 20 warheads were already in place .
 The cia's view, concurred in by the Defense Intelligence Agency as far as I know, was based on two firm pieces of evidence . The defense Intelligence Agency concurred with the cia, the CIA and the CIA .
 Our massive photo recon recon reconnaissance effort never revealed any evidence of warheads being shipped in or present . The U.S. State Department never found any evidence that warheads were shipped in .
 There was firm evidence that structural elements we knew were designed for nuclear weapons bunkers did arrive and were being assembled at two locations, but that these were not operational . The structural elements were assembled in two locations but not operational, it was claimed .
 It is also known that nuclear war heads were on the Soviet ship Poltava, which turned back in face of U.S. naval quarantine .
 Raymond Garthoff is willing to give credence to Soviet assertions that 20 nuclear warheads arrived in Cuba before the blockade . But he insists they were never placed at a missile site . GarThoff says they were not placed at missile sites .
 David Garthoff is the best qualified expert in the world on the crisis, says CNN.com . Because of his recent researches, he says he is the world's most qualified expert on crisis .
 I disagree with his carefully hedged willingness to accept Soviet claims on this point . Nevertheless, I disagree . Nevertheless I disagree. Nevertheless, he says: 'I disagree with him carefully hedging . willingness to . accept Soviet claim on this matter'
 No Soviet expert active during the crisis gave any concrete evidence to substantiate this new Soviet assertion . The claims were made by Soviet experts during the Cold War .
 There is an ideological motive for featuring this assertion about the nose cones, whether true or not . There is also a political motive for the claim, whether it is true or false .
 It is obviously very much part of the Soviet agenda to persuade American participants that the two nations were on the brink of nuclear war and that Khrushchev's reasonable flexibility narrowly averted the destruction of civilization .
 "The thought that nuclear warheads were actually present makes this danger much more palpable," says author .
 Cia and military planners assumed that nuclear nose cones might be there . But photo experts who briefed me found no evidence that they were .
 The vast number of over flights in that hectic 13 days makes me believe some inkling of the arrival of nose cones would have been found among the thousands and thousands of frames of film, had they actually been on the spot .
 The theme presented at the Moscow sympo sium makes sense for the Soviet Union . Since Gorbachev is now engaged in selling everyone on the values of a nuclear-free world, it makes sense .
 A healthy fear of nuclear weapons' destructiveness was a key factor in avoiding war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Fear was a healthy fear in avoiding nuclear war in the 1950s and 1960s .
 Khrushchev stood down all proposals for military moves by Soviet forces during the week of October 22, 1962 .
 It is also revealing that Soviet officials vowed after the crisis was defused that the Soviet Union would never again be in such a comparatively weak position of military power .
 Soviet leaders promptly began the costly massive buildup of an astonishing array of missiles that finally brought Moscow to a position of strategic parity with Washington . In fact Soviet leaders began to begin the costly buildup of the missiles .
 Never again after about 1970 would an American president be able to make Soviet leaders worry much about escalation to nuclear war .
 Gorbachev recognizes that his predecessors starved the Soviet economy to pay for the nuclear weapons that Leonid Brezhnev bought in the 1960s and 1970s . U.S.R. wants us all to believe that nuclear weapons keep the superpowers perilously close to war .
 None of these propositions are proven, and in my view they are probably wrong, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "I'm not sure if these propositions have been proven, but I'm sure they are wrong"
 The superpowers still are fundamentally different societies, geopolitically and geographically confronting one another across the gulf of the deep difference between a totally state-owned economy under a one-party dictatorship and a pluralist democratic market economy . The world's most powerful superpowers are confronted by the gulf
 The systemic conflict and geopolitical proximity are the reason the military weapons exist, not vice versa, the author says . The system of conflict and proximity is the reason for military weapons to exist .
 Nobody qualified to judge has ever suggested, however, that any group of Soviet party leaders would expose the homeland of the Soviet Union to a serious risk of extensive nuclear damage in order to save an asset .
 Even to this day Moscow has never included Cuba in the Warsaw Pact or any formal military alliance, despite repeated re quests from Castro to be admitted to the inner club . Even after repeated requests from Castro, Russia has never accepted Cuba's membership .
 Leninism as taught in the party schools cries out against any suggestion that the Soviet motherland should suffer to protect a client state, preferring to retreat from danger so as to live to fight another day .
 History repeatedly reveals that Moscow follows this principle, sacrificing political dependencies as necessary, most notably in the retreat from Afghanistan . History repeatedly shows that Moscow followed this principle .
 Gorbachev still emulates Lenin and is undoubtedly following this policy of prudent withdrawals aimed at strengthening the centralized control system .
 Khrushchev had a broader strategic goal in 1962, with the endgame focusing on Berlin . I am convinced that Khrushvic had a larger goal in mind in 1962 . The endgame was likely to be focused on Berlin, says historian .
 Khrushchev knew the deployment would cause a worldwide political storm . Kennedy would simply be obliged to get used to the idea of having missiles in substantial numbers pointed at the United States .
 The aim was to alter the psychological and political perceptions of the balance of power, particularly in Washington . Unlike Bundy and McNamara, I agree with what I understand to be the views of Garthoff and Paul Nitze .
 Khrushchev had tried to deceive Kennedy with misleading state ments about offensive weapons in the summer of 1962 . I am sure the impact on American thinking would have been shattering if we had not detected the missiles before they were deployed .
 In any case Khrushchev was not crazy enough to fire the missiles, although he was a great braggart about the destructiveness of his military weapons . The missile attack was not the first of its kind in Soviet history .
 He surely meant to shock world opinion into thinking he had got the whip hand over the U.S. by his deployment of missiles to Cuba . But he did not .
 42 missiles, the number actually delivered to Cuba, would have doubled the total first-strike capability available to the Soviet Union in the fall of 1962 . After all, 42 missiles were delivered to the Cuban government, the U.S. says .
 Khrushchev then would have tried to cash in his chips in Berlin . Kennedy was immobilized from resort to nuclear retaliation as a result of this sudden jump to missile parity .
 It might have worked, especially as there were divergences among the European allies about the price to be paid for Berlin . Against the backdrop of a sudden nuclear scare, it may have worked .
 There was substantial evidence of Soviet diplomatic maneuvering and actual forward deployments of Soviet military units in Germany before the Cuban crisis .
 Moscow could regain strategic momentum in Berlin, where Moscow has enormous advantages in mounting threats and conducting military operations . In this way he could regain control of Berlin, which he could gain strategic momentum, he says .
 If Kennedy and his nato partners had capitulated on Berlin, as some might have wished, the course of superpower relations in the 1960s and later decades would have been entirely different . If Kennedy had not capitulated, it would have led to a change in superpower relations .
 Soviet President Anastas Mikoyan's post-crisis visit to Washington is the best evidence that he had in mind a scheme larger than simply protecting his Caribbean investment is presented in a book .
 Khrushchev was under pressure at this time to do something to restore his prestige . The final point worth making is that he was under heavy pressure to fulfill his boasts and threats about changing the ground rules .
 Kennedy countered his threatening advances in Germany with firm statements and gestures of determination to defend Berlin . Kennedy had countered his . statements with . firm statements of . determination to . defend Berlin, he said .
 The United States also had revealed the cia's findings from remote-sensing satellite imagery that the Soviet Union had only a few iCBMs, rather than the superior force Khrushchev had implied .
 The 1956 Revolution and Realpolitik, Stanford : Hoover Institution Press, 1972, 137. The 1956 revolution and realpolitik was a revolution in the Soviet Union .
 I closed the meeting on August 21 by observing we might be about to see the greatest act of risk-taking since the war . I said we might . see the . greatest act . of risk taking since the . war .
 Khrushchev did indeed take the gigantic risk of deploying missiles to Cuba in order to destabilize Germany and nato . He hoped thereby to alter perceptions of the relative strength of the two superpowers .
 We ought to press Soviet officials to open up their archives, not simply accept the simplistic Soviet message about Khrushchev defending Cuba against American military attack . The U.S. should press them to open their archives as the United States has done, the U.N. says .
 Washington had no plans to attack, as the approval of the covert operations Mongoose plan plainly established . The plan was approved by the U.S. government, as well as the CIA .
 CIA insider: "I was well informed about this operation. In my position at the CIA at the time I was well aware of this operation" CIA insider says he was "well informed" about operation .
 There was no basis in American policy for a Soviet fear of an American invasion of Cuba when Khrushchev was making his decision to base missiles there, says historian .
 Claims that these fears motivated Khrushchev are a blatant case of historical revisionism to justify Khrushchev's dangerous gamble . Claims that Khrushchchev's fears motivated him are an example of historical .
 The message from the Moscow symposium of 1989 has too much topspin of glasnost to be convincing . The message of the 1989 symposium is not convincing. The message is still not convincing, however .
 What we understood in 1962 ought to be part of our strategic thinking, until conclusive evidence to the contrary is put on the table for scholarly historical evaluation . What we understand in 1962 should be considered part of strategic thinking .