 First published in Great Britain in 2000 by Heinemann Library, Halley Court, Jordan Hill, Oxford .
 The dates in brackets after a person’s name give the years that he or she lived . The dates are shown to give the year that the person lived .
 An explanation of difficult words can be found in the glossary on page 30 of this book .
 The USSR had already put the first person into space in 1961 . But the USSR had happened during the ’60s .
 Each great nation saw how space could be used for military purposes by orbiting spy satellites and missiles of mass destruction . Each nation also saw how . space could . be used to . spy satellites, missiles of . mass destruction and spy satellites .
 As the decade developed, the rush for supremacy in space drove scientific research and technological invention at a great pace . The rush for dominance in space led to scientific research, technological invention .
 Spin-offs from space and military programmes flooded into everyday life . Live colour television beamed around the world by satellite, and sightsaving laser eye surgery . Laser eye surgery, plastic disposable clothes and non-stick coatings on frying pans .
 Telstar 2 was an early comsat (communications satellite) relaying phone calls and television channels . It was the first comsat to relay phone calls, television channels and phone calls . Telstar was launched in 1961 .
 Atoms were 4 made of even tinier y bits, such as electrons, protons and neutrons . Atoms made of 4 atoms made of tiny bits such as atoms .
 By the 1960s, new evidence from more powerful particleaccelerators or ‘atomsmashers’ pointed to even smaller particles . By the 1970s, more powerful particles were found to be even smaller .
 In the 1950s Murray GellMann, at the California Institute of Technology, had studied cosmic rays . Electron orbits around nucleus at centre .
 Strange particles in them did not follow the usual laws of atomic physics . They were found to be 'strange particles' that didn't follow atomic physics'
 Gell-Mann analyzed the idea of ‘strangeness’ using maths using maths and extended it to the structure of the atom . He also extended the idea using maths to extend it to atoms .
 It showed that protons, neutrons and similar particles were made of even smaller pieces — quarks . The discovery of quarks led to the discovery of a new type of particle physics . It showed protons and neutrons were actually made of smaller pieces, quarks.
 Murray Gell-Mann became Professor of Theoretical Physics in 1956 . He received a Nobel Prize for physics in 1969 . Murray won the Nobel Prize in 1968 .
 On a larger scale, new science was solving ancient mysteries . NUCLEUS PARTICLES EARTH ON THE MOVE: Earth on the move .
 Paleomagnetism was the developing study of particles magnetized by the Earth’s natural magnetic field, trapped as rocks formed millions of years ago . It was the first study of the study of magnetized particles .
 The idea of continental drift was suggested in 1912 by German weather expert Alfred Wegener . With more new information, especially from the first survey satellites, it supported the idea .
 Earth’s land masses were once all together and drifted to their present positions . The theory of plate tectonics is based on the theory that the land masses once formed together .
 In the 1960s new evidence from rock layers, drill holes, satellites and fossils came together into the theory of plate tectonics .
 This says the major land masses are carried around the globe on giant curved plates of rock . This is according to the theory that the world's major land mass is carried around by giant curved plate plates .
 The plates grow as molten rock oozes from below and adds to their edges . The plates are created by molten rock from below .
 They crumple into mountains, and cause earthquakes and volcanoes as they rub together . They create mountains and create volcanoes, causing earthquakes and earthquakes .
 Alfred Wegene. crumpled into mountains . Ocean Continent movement . Ocean continent .
 Seabed crust slides under continental crust . Two seabed plates move apart . Seabes move under continental continental crust.
 Astronomers peered through telescopes across the Universe and analyzed the mass of information from new satellites . New rock wells up from below maa .
 In 1963, radio astronomers noticed an incredibly powerful source of radio and other waves far across the Universe . The discovery was made by radio astronomers in 1963 .
 A pulsar ‘flashes’ on and off like a lighthouse, sending out radio rather than light waves . It seemed no bigger than an average star, like our Sun, yet gave out more energy .
 Regular radio blips from pulsars fuelled ideas of aliens in space . A quasar is thought to be matter and is believed to be a quasar . A pulsar pulsars pulsars have been pulsars for more than a century .
 Some radio telescopes have many dish some were secret military test craft . But some were hoaxes, some were natural weather features like ball lightning . Some were hoax hoaxes and others were hoaxed .
 As far as we know, none of the antennae linked by we know was an alien spacecraft. computer .
 They work as one giant dish to detect very weak radio signals from the centre of a galaxy . The galaxy is one of the largest radio telescopes in the world .
 Within weeks they noticed strange pulses of radio signals, 1.2 seconds apart, from far away in our Galaxy . Within weeks, they noticed regular pulses from far from afar from Earth .
 Scientists worked out the signals were given off by fast-spinning neutron stars . The neutron stars are the remnants of old giant stars that collapse into themselves .
 Our eyes see light rays from the Sun, Moon, stars, planets and other objects in space . Our eyes are able to see the Sun and Moon's light rays . We also see stars and planets around the world .
 Many other kinds of rays also reach Earth from space, including natural radio waves, microwaves and cosmic rays .
 Radio telescopes can ‘see’ or detect them using radio telescopes . They are invisible to our eyes but radio telescopes can detect them . Radio telescopes are able to 'see or detect' or 'see' or detect these invisible objects .
 Radio telescopes use antennae shaped like large dishes, or long wires strung on towers to receive the signals .
 Radio astronomy began in the mid 1940s but expanded greatly in the 1960s . Radio astronomy expanded in the 60s and '60s .
 A quasar pours out unimaginable amounts of energy from the heart of a galaxy . The quasar is believed to be the largest quasar in the history of the universe .
 The objects are among the most distant and powerful objects discovered so far . They were discovered by scientists in the 1970s and 1980s .
 Parabolic dish reflects and concentrates incoming waves on to receiver . Dish tilt and tilt reflect and concentrate incoming waves onto receiver .
 USSR announced it had put the first human into space on 12 April 1961 . It was a shock when the USSR announced the first mission to space in 1961 .
 During the Cold War of the 1960s, Soviet Russia frequently displayed its military might . The Cold War was a tense stand-off between the Soviet and American allies .
 Intercontinental ballistic missiles, armed with nuclear warheads, were one spin-off from the space race . capitalist USA and allied western nations, and the communist-based USSR and eastern European allies, were the two countries involved in the race to win the race .
 The success of the first manned space flight was a huge boost for the USSR’s scientific reputation and for its political system .
 Gagarin’s craft, Vostok 1, was launched 5 years ago . Capsule separates into orbit by a Soviet A-1 rocket with the aid of four strap-on boosters .
 On XN re-entry, spacecraft was protected by heat shield . It had very few controls — the astronaut was large 4 Second stage bs rocket fires .
 Its shield deflected the enormous heat of re-entry as the craft plunged back into the blanket of air around Earth, the atmosphere, at more than 8,000 km/h .
 At the time the USSR announced garin stayed in his craft until it t he ejected at a height of out 6 és iilomeue and parachuted down separately . He ejected from his craft at height of 6 meters .
 On 16 June 1963 Vostok 6 rried the first woman, Valentina Tereshkova, into space . In 1961 President John F Kennedy declared the USA’s main aim in space was to land a man on the Moon and bring him back safely .
 Yuri Gagarin, a former USSR air force pilot, was the first person in space . He became the first man to go into space in 1961 .
 His craft, the ball-shaped Vostok, had already been used to carry Sputnik satellites . It was tested in several unmanned flights .
 Gagarin took Join Clem ibore off from Baikanour Space 1921 . He made his first flight in a Mercury craft, Friendship 7 .
 1998 he became Volga River after a flight the oldest astronaut when he went into space again on the space shuttle . 1998 he landed near the 1.2 billion kilometer of Earth and landed near . Earth .
 The USA was stung into action and soon had its own own After his astronauts . The USA responded to the news of the astronauts being stranded in space .
 The USSR now space in space in a Soyuz craft when he was killed in concentrated on building an orbiting a jet fighter training accident .
 Shepard on 5 May and Virgil Grissom space station and unmanned deepspace probes. Shepard on May 5 May . Shepard on space station . Virgil-Grissom mission to space station on May 1 .
 The USA, on the other hand, developed from the one-person Mercury craft, to the two-person ‘ae by Gemini, then to the threeen person Apollo — to send astronauts to the Moon . The USA developed from Mercury to Apollo to the one person craft .
 A satellite is now launched every week or two . ATELLITE REVOLUTION DATOS PETE EES WEES AER . A satellite was launched every month or two.
 In the 1960s satellites were new and every launch made global headlines . The launch of satellites was a major event in space travel history .
 Telstar and Early Bird became almost like celebrities - as famous as the human stars of movies, sport and pop music . Some, like Telstar, became almost celebrities like celebrities, as well as celebrities .
 The TIROS series of 10 satellites were launched between 1960 and 1965 . They carried television cameras to picture the clouds far below .
 The information was radioed down to Earth and used to make the first satelliteaided weather forecasts . The weather forecast was used to predict the weather in the early 1900s .
 TIROS 10 (Television and Infrared Observation Satellite) was launched in 1965 . It was the first satellite to transmit infrared images into the sky .
 Astronauts go on space walks when they need to repair their craft, or satellites . Astronauts will be on the ground when they are on a mission to fix satellites .
 First was the USSR’s Alexei Leonov in 1965, soon followed by the USA’�s Edward White, shown above . Russia's first major success was in 1964, followed by USA's Edward White .
 USSR space probe Venera 4 parachuted an instrument capsule through the atmosphere in 1967 . The probe parachuted into the atmosphere with a capsule carrying instruments .
 In the 60s huge dishes like Goonbilly in Cornwall, England picked up the signals and passed them to the terrestrial system .
 Telstar 1 sent live black-and-white television pictures from the USA to Europe in July 1962 . In July 1962, Telstar broadcast live black and white television pictures .
 Telstar 2 went one better and relayed the first live colour television images across the Atlantic in May 1963 . In May 1963, TelStar 2 relayed live colour images from the UK .
 Because the satellites were in low oval orbits they could only be used for short periods, unlike today’s television satellites . Because of the satellites, they were only able to use them for a short period .
 Venera 4 reached in orbit © the orbit of Venus, its a descent capsule . Descent capsule separated from it, and separates and enters the atmosphere . A parachute opened to atmosphere ® slow its descent, and its . instruments switched on to + start transmitting data .
 It took 94 minutes before the massive atmospheric pressure J crushed it . J crushed the planet in 94 minutes .
 The most spectacular science-based event of the 20th century happened on 20 July 1969 . Capsule caves in 25 kilometres above the surface of Venus pr Atl Nimaveon .
 The Moon landing was the climax of ten years of incredible technological advance in almost all areas of science, from computing to medicine . It was the culmination of a decade of technological advances in almost every aspect of science .
 In May ’69 Apollo 10 went all the way to the NY Coleyome-teve Mer tu ule meltiar II the tests, but did not land . Apollo 10 was launched from New York City in May '69 .
 This was attached to the Service Escape tower Module with its life-support equipment and rocket, except for final re-entry to Earth . The rocket is attached to a service escape tower Module, which was attached with a rocket and life support .
 The Lunar Module detached from the CM to land on the Moon with two astronauts . The two astronauts were on board for the mission .
 U.S. physicist Theodore Maiman powered up the first working version of the device in 1960 . The device dates back to 1960 when Maiman was a physicist .
 Prokhorov’s research work helped Maiman build a practical laser . Maiman's laser laser was developed by Maiman in 2007 .
 A laser is based on a substance called the active medium — in Maiman’s case, a rod of ruby crystal . Maiman's laser works in a lab in New York .
 A flash tube wrapped around it pumps MASERS TO LASERS light energy into the crystal . The crystal is then illuminated by a flash of light energy .
 A similar device called a maser, that works with between mirrors, become stronger and finally microwaves rather than light waves, had been built in'1954 . These gather together, bounce to and from a similar device, which works with mirrors, becomes stronger and become stronger . These
 Light flash from tube gives atoms extra energy . A scientist tries to create a laser using gas as the active medium .
 DNA and RNA have different sequences of chemicals that code for different amino acids . amino acids are amino acids, which clip together to make proteins, from which all living things are built . DNA andRNA are different sequences, which code for amino acids and DNA .
 The first ‘code-word’ to be identified was the sequence UUU which represented the tL isenctic sequences show up as ‘bar codes’, amino acid phenylalanine . UUU represented the sequences shown as 'bar codes'
 Holograms are images that can be viewed from different angles to see around and behind objects, yet they are contained on a flat surface . They are holograms that can also be seen from angles, but can be seen around objects .
 A holographic image is recorded on photographic film like an ordinary photo . But it does not show different colours and shades of light . Holographic images are recorded on film like ordinary photos .
 It shows where two sets of laser light beams come together and interfere or cancel each other out . Laser light beams are shown to show where they come together or cancel out .
 These suggested how long-distance air travel might progress in different ways . Air travel has become more and more popular in recent years .
 Concorde was for people with money and in a hurry, says Tf.com . Concorde is a fast-moving plane, not a big plane, says the British Transport Authority .
 The manned submersible Trieste dived to 10,911 m in the Pacific, in 1960 . But the plane encountered several problems such as the high temperatures created on its metal ‘skin’ by its great speed, its noisy engines, and the sonic boom as it went
 The Jumbo jet had a new type of jet engine, the turbofan . It ‘Sun yuasoOuaN went into service in 1970, and in various
 It was similar to a standard jet but with a very large, angle-bladed turbine ‘fan’ at the front . The jet had a large, angled fan 'fan' at the top of it .
 The fan worked like a propeller to push air backwards around the engine for added thrust . The fan also pushed air backwards into the engine to make the plane fly .
 ‘bypass’ air also made the main engine run at a lower temperature and more quietly . This 'bypass' air also helped make the engine run more quietly and quieter .
 Large fan provides Turbines drive compressor extra thrust and large fan models since, has sold well over 1,000 compared to Concorde’s 15.1,000 . Large fan models have sold more than a million times since Concorde was launched in 1970 .
 Japanese Shinkansen ‘bullet trains’ went into service in 1965S. Almost halved the journey time on some routes .
 The hovercraft, invented in the 1950s, went into service on short, busy sea routes such as across the Channel between Britain and France .
 The ’60s pioneering spirit extended from space to the ground and far below . The ‘60s was the first time the U.S. space program was launched in the 1960s .
 The tiny Mini car was advertised as fun to drive and convenient around town . Mini Mini was launched in 2007 and is now available on eBay for $35,000 .
 It caught the public's imagination despite cramped seats and minimal luggage space . Despite cramped seats, the plane was packed full of passengers .
 In 1960 Jacques Piccard and Donald Walsh descended to the deepest part of the ocean, the Marianas Trench near Japan, in the deep-sea submersible Trieste . It was still a record deep dive .
 Bell Company’s ‘Pogo’ was an experimental platform thrust into the air by its own jet . Bell Company's 'Pogo' was thrust into air by a jet thrust by the jet . The Bell Company was the first company to launch a personal jet .
 It was part of a combined research programme into vertical take-off jet planes, military ‘jet belts’ and maybe one day, personal jetpowered hovercraft .
 The Austin-Morris Mini was designed in 1959 by Alec Issigonis . A Bell Pogo trip in 1967 was the first time the Mini was driven by Pogo drivers .
 Its transverse engine and front wheel drive saved parts and so space and cost . The car was designed to save parts and space and drive costs .
 Unitary or modular building seeme ‘Unitary technology’ safe if all modules stayed intact to * ’ strength to the whole structure . Unitary technology seems to be safe if modules stay intact to all modules staying intact .
 Inspired by the experimental spirit of the decade, architects and building engineers designed houses based on mass-produced sections or modules . Rae “i 7 Pe a y ts ao”
 These of Ronan were made in factories, then quickly ‘plugged in’ on Tate Point, London, 1968 . site. site .
 The aim was to manufacture modern, safe, hygienic housing at a very low cost . The aim of the project was to make modern, hy-ensensive housing .
 The modular system applied the idea of the assembly line to making entire houses, offices and factories . The modular modular system was developed in the 1970s and 1980s .
 In practice some materials were not strong or long-lasting enough . But in practice some of the materials not strong enough .
 In certain buildings the roofs leaked, the walls and joints cracked and the floors were not level . Roofs leaked, walls cracked, the floors not level and the roof leaked .
 Glass was easy to blow into bottles and similar shapes but difficult to form into large, flat sheets . Glass was difficult to make into bottles or similar shapes, but easy to create into sheets .
 The float glass process developed by the 1960s was a great leap forward . It was the first time float glass glass could be made into a glass bottle .
 The glass oozed like syrup to form a ribbon, smooth on the top and against the mirror-like surface of the tin beneath . The ribbon was smooth on top and on the bottom of a tin .
 Many petrochemical by-products and other substances can be broken down into what chemists call monomer hydrocarbons . Chemists can also break down substances such as carbon monomers .
 The monomers are then heated and treated to link them together into polymers, like beads in enormously long molecular necklaces . They are then used to make dozens of different types of plastics .
 Acrylic is the plastic polymer polymer PMMA, polymethy| Acrylic fibre is drawn methacrylate . Acrylate is the polymer polymer .
 Spinneret can be ‘squirted’ through tiny through dryer and then on is holes in a spinneret to make fibres, or to be stretched, crimped ; . formed into blocks and sheets for all kinds and baled .
 Acrylic-type plastics had first been developed in the 1930s as glass-like clear j sheets . Liquid acrylic is forced through spinneret into bath to form fibre .
 Perspex and | Plexiglass were used for high-speed or high-stress applications where glass might shatter, splinter and cause injury . They were used in high-risk applications such as high speed or high stress applications . They are now known as Perspex, or Plexig
 In the 1960s, acrylic followed rayon and nylon to become the latest, most fashionable artificial fibre .
 1967's Blow Chair supposedly spread the body's weight for ultra; comfort . 1967’s Blow Chair was similar to the current 'Blow Chair' concept .
 artificial materials led to some very unusual products, such as see-through televisions and blow-up furniture . But a tiny pinprick... artificial materials are still being used to make the products .
 Materials technologists pushed these new substances to the limit in all manner of Ea unusual ways .
 During the 1960s most people were not yet aware of environmental concerns and the need to conserve and recycle natural resources . The THROWAWAY SOCIETY was formed in the early 1960s . The society was formed by the group of throwers and recyclers .
 The same applied to manufacturing. a These transparent dresses e from 1966 were made of te plastic. a
 They were designed to be worn once or 1 twice, then thrown away . They were uncomfortable and sticky to wear, but that mattered little .
 Domestic electrical equipment of the 1960s benefited greatly from the space race and military research . Dresses by Hechter of Paris. bECTECH .
 By 1970 transistors, in general use since the early 1950s, were already being replaced by integrated circuits . By 1970, transistors had already been replaced by transistors .
 An integrated circuit, IC, is made with all the transistors, resistors and other electronic components already in position and connected together or integrated, rather than manufactured separately and linked by wires . An IC is made from all of the transistor and resistors already in place .
 Integrated circuits are made from semiconductor materials such as silicon or germanium, grown in high-pressure vats as lump crystals .
 Components are etched or ‘carved’ onto the surface with acid or laser light . Components were etched or 'carved' on the surface using laser light or acid .
 In the early 1960s computers were rare and room-sized, found only in government departments, big businesses and universities . L 5 Chip incorporated into plastic case with connectors ; 4 Wafer cut into chips ——t# 3 Components printed or etched on wafer .
 They were not operated directly by typewriter-style keyboards until 1967 . They were first operated by ordinary typewriter style keyboards .
 Before In-car television Pega te ome ae ae ‘ _ | was available in ed in from reels of punched paper tape tape .
 Large reels of magnetic tape magnetic tape were used to record programmes and information .
 People had money to spend, which encouraged new areas of manufacturing . People were able to spend more than $100,000 a year on average .
 Radios, televisions, vinyl record players and similar equipment sold in huge numbers . Radios and televisions also sold huge numbers of TVs, radios and record players .
 The first human heart transplant took place in Cape Town, South Africa, in 1967 . The first heart transplant was performed by a team of surgeons .
 Chief surgeon for this historic operation was Christiaan Barnard . it was not a very demanding or difficult procedure . Chief surgeon was Christaan Barnar .
 Its importance lay in the old idea that if the heart stopped, the body was dead . The heart stopped in the 1930s, and the body died in the process .
 In 1966 French doctors were first to use the idea of brain inactivity, rather than a stopped heart, as the main sign of death .
 Focused laser beam hits the retina with pinpoint accuracy . Blue-green light of the argon laser enters the eye through the pupil . Optic nerve .
 One of the first practical uses of laser light was eye surgery, from 1962 . Laser light was used in eye surgery in the 1960s .
 A ruby laser beam could be directed accurately to cut just a tiny area with its intense heat, leaving nearby tissues undamaged . It could cut just one tiny area of the human body with the intense heat .
 The beam passed through the outer layers without harming them and carried out its work at a precise depth . The beam came to a concentrated point or focus inside the eye so that it passed through .
 The beam’s heat also ‘welded’ blood vessels closed as it passed, so there was less bleeding than with a scalpel incision . Blood vessels also 'weld' closed as the beam passed, making there less bleeding .
 The laser can ‘spot-weld’ a loose or detached retina back to the inside of the eyeball . It can also be used to 'spot-wld' a detached retina to get it back inside the eye .
 In 1965, Francis LEsperance argued that the bluegreen light of an argon laser would be more effective than a ruby laser . The blue green light of argon would have been more effective .
 In 1968, he treated his first human patient with an argon laser in the early microscope could see much smaller items than the light microscope . In 1968 he used the laser to treat first human patients with .
 Small blobs are individual bacterial germs, seen through a scanning electron microscope . Microscopic images show individual bacterial bacteria .
 Electron microscopes use beams of electron particles to see much tinier objects than with an ordinary light microscope . Electron microscope uses beams of electrons to see smaller objects .
 Instead of looking through a tiny object or very thin slice, as in other microscopes, the electron beam scans to and fro across its surface . The new microscopes use an electron beam to scan across the surface of an object .
 They included measles in female hormonal cycle to 1965 and rubella (german Pict ean ae measles) in 1969 . It altered the timing of the hormonal changes .
 In 1967 another hormone-based P vaccination was introduced . In a few people fell ill after 1967 another P vaccination . In 1967, a few cases of P vaccination were reported in the UK .
 New guidelines i ; a ee were introduredieeaaaaan pill was introduced to do the \ people who had certain opposite .
 Most types of electrical appliances designed to take the hard work out of chores, such as washing machines and vacuum cleaners, were well established by the 1960s . Cleaning machines and vacuuming machines were among the most popular household appliances .
 The new generation of gadgets was more to do with convenience, entertainment, leisure and just plain fun . The new gadgets were more than do with convenient convenience and entertainment, than entertainment .
 Shrinking electronics, smaller batteries, plastics, and new methods of mass production have made for a range of smaller, more portable, hand-held devices .
 They are designed to look bright, work quickly, and be simple to operate . They were designed to be easy to operate and look bright .
 The skateboard craze began in 1962 with boards rolling on ball-bearing wheels made of new, soft but tough rubber . Skateboards rolled on ball bearing wheels made from new rubber .
 A quartz wristwatch is based on a crystal of quartz — the same mineral that forms sand grains . A quartz watch can be made from a quartz crystal . The quartz crystal is used to make a watch .
 An electric current passed through the crystal makes it oscillate or vibrate exactly 32,768 times each second . The crystal oscillates or vibrates every time it is passed through an electric current .
 A microchip counts vibrations and produces pulses of electricity that turn the rotor . The watch hands are turned by the vibrations of the watch's vibrations .
 Magnetic tape was used by professionals to record and play music . Large reels of magnetic tape were used by professional to record music .
 Cassette tape was too you could record as well as narrow and moved too slowly past the record/playback was also more convenient than | head to produce highquality sound . Unlike vinyl discs, Cassette tapes could be used to record as much as a cassette .
 ‘Convenience’ and ‘ease of use’ were the new key terms . This new sound medium discs and less affected by HAPPY SNAPS were the most popular .
 Consumer gadgets seemed simple, but this masked sophisticated design and advanced technology . Consumer gadgets were simple and sophisticated, but sophisticated design masked sophistication .
 The photos might not be quite up qrie & to professional standards but were good MAO inst enough for most people . The photos may not be up to professional standard but were pretty good for most .
 Feltand fibre-tip pens were softer and easier to control . artificial grass Astroturf, first used in the US’s Houston Astrodome, was first used .
 In the 1970s, the effects began to appear as pollution and other environmental problems . But in the next decade, the environmental problems began to be more pronounced .
 ATOM is the smallest part of a pure substance (chemical Putsar) A relatively small, element that can exist amazingly heavy or dense star naturally . ATOM The smallest part . of a . pure substance .
 Most atoms are that gives off pulses of energy made of three types of atoms . It is probably a fast-spinning tinier particles called protons, neutron star left over from the explosion of a giant star .
 It perhaps consists of an entire Emission of Radiation . galaxy falling into a giant black hole . galaxy .
 1960s tells the story of the pioneers of innovations such as manned space travel, genetic science, transplant surgery, high-speed electric trains, and plastic surgery .