 U.S. leaders discovered that the Sotine mission was a mission to gather data . The Sotine was used to gather information from the French capital .
 The pictures the viets were installing nuclear missiles in Cuba, aircraft took of the ground disclosed develop they were stunned .
 Khrushchev or Castro’s photos revealed Soviet efforts to install approximately intentions . The photos were taken during the days of the Cold War in the Soviet Union .
 In October, Americans repeatedly warned the Soviets against attempt to put missiles in Cuba . Americans did not know the answers to the question: Americans didn't know the answer .
 The Soviets assured the U.S. that they had no Khrushchev’s motives aside, the White intention of giving the Cubans nuclear mis mis misidentified .
 U.S. warned against putting missiles only nonnuclear weapons to defend the island in Cuba . Cuba would receive nored United States warnings from the United States . Cuba pledged to receive warnings from United States about putting missiles on Cuba .
 President Kennedy was especially infrom . dignant at the secrecy surrounding the Soviet operation . The operation was a secret affair .
 Kennedy administration officials recognized that members of Congress and the U.S. had no need for the Soviet Union to shift its weapons for the repulsion of aggression, for example .
 For the search for sites for them beyond the first time, American territory would be highly . vulnerable to Soviet nuclear attack . The search for them would be difficult for the Soviets .
 The question was not whether September 11, 1962 the missiles should be removed but how . From the —TASS U.S. perspective, the question is not whether to remove the missiles, but how should they be removed?
 The discovery of evidence that nuclear advisers decided to keep their knowledge of missiles had been sent to Cuba forced United States the missiles secret from the Soviets and the leaders to respond . Initially, President Kennedy and his aides initially thought the missiles were a secret .
 The president the reconnaissance photos were examined on called together his closest and most trusted October 15 was the most dangerous confrontaadvisers to help him manage the crisis . On October 16, the president the president .
 Group was the Executive Committee of the States of the Cold War . This was the Soviet Union and the United States . The United States and the USSR were the two Cold War allies .
 Today, it is known to Americans as “the President Kennedy and ExComm met to Cuban missile crisis,” to Soviets as ‘the Caribconsider the options for removing the Soviet bean crisis’ and to Cubans .
 At no other time in history has the three distinct choices for U.S. action, rangworld come so close to nuclear war . ing from the purely diplomatic to a full-scale military assault. ing .
 President Kennedy weighed each proposal carefully . JFK weighed each carefully . President Kennedy made a decision on the decision .
 On October 20, President Kennedy decided on a blockade of Cuba by the United States Navy to prevent further shipments of military supplies to the island . The blockade was imposed by the U.S. on October 20 .
 The president decided to use the word "quarantine" instead of the word “blockade” because international law considered a blockade to be an act of war . International law considers a blockade of the U.S. to be a war .
 This option allowed the president to steer a middle course among ExComm’s varied options . This option was the president's first attempt to steer the course of action .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro convinced that the U.S. was going to attack Cuba . Fidel Castro believed that the United States would attack Cuba in the 1950s . Castro was convinced by Castro that the US would attack him .
 On October 26, 1962, he wrote a letter to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev . The letter was sent to the Soviet leader in 1962 .