 After the coverage of Katrina and Rita, I’m convinced that you have to flunk kindergarten to become a reporter . After Katrina, Rita, Katrina and Katrina, I'm convinced that .
 I have a rise of 3.6’ in the first 24’ section and then a platform followed by a rise . of 1.8' in the next 12’s sections . I have run of 27’ with a run of . 27' with a rise
 "I offered to let them stay in my shelter for only $4,300 per person per day," she says . And to think I offered to help them stay there, she says, she offered to stay in her shelter for $3,000 a day .
 Lewis Burwell Puller was the scion of an old and respected, but not wealthy, Virginia family . He was the son of a respected and not wealthy family . Puller died in 1918 .
 The family was proud of their Confederate officers who had been killed during the War of Northern Aggression, that dark page in American history . They were proud of Confederate officers killed in that war .
 He lost a leg in Nam and stumped his way to Basra during the 1st Gulf War in charge of the VII Corps in the highly successful ""Hail Mary"" maneuver against fourteen Iraqi divisions .
 Army Sergeant First Class Paul Ray Smith was awarded the Medal of Honor for actions he took on April 4, 2003 . President Bush gave the award to Smith in 2005 .
 This was the first Medal of Honor awarded to anyone for action in Iraq or the Persian Gulf . This was first medal of honor awarded to a man in the Gulf .
 Most recent previous recipients were Gary Gordon and Randy Shughart in Somalia .
 "At least getting a loan and buying a completed shelter, I wouldn’t have to tar and feather it myself," says owner of shelter . "I’m not going to have to get a loan," she says .
 As I contemplated that 24’ deep hole, it occurred to me that I’d forgotten about a water supply . As I stood and contemplated that . hole, I realized that I hadn't forgotten about . a water . supply .
 Palmdale treats its water in order to avoid people getting the whatever . Palmdare treats water to avoid getting sickened by the whatever.
 I had gone to bottled water for a number of years, a good plan, and then replaced the bottled water with a reverse osmosis filter, a bad plan . I had a good idea, but I had to change my water filter, and it was a bad idea, says
 I set up a search on my computer to find the link in one of my nearly 50 stories where I wrote about those plastic water tanks . The story is one of more than 50 stories I've written about plastic water storage .
 Between the shed and the planter, I had room to put in a fuel tank and a water tank, buried, of course . The shed had room for fuel and water tanks, buried .
 One squirrel had said he had 2 generators, a 4kw and an 11 kw . One squirrel said he rarely used the 11kw. One squirrel told CNN he has 2 generators and 1 generator .
 I was thinking of something more on the order of 1 Mw when it occurred to me that with natural/LP gas prices rising and diesel being about $3.40 a gallon my appetite was bigger than my pocketbook . I was considering a 1-mw version of the 1
 I settled for 3rd best, Generac, and went shopping at TSC in Bakersfield, California . I settled with Generac .
 Generac Guardian Industrial/Commercial Portable generator is cheaper to buy than the same sized unit . Generac Emergency Automatic Automatic Automatic Home Standby Generators $2,395 $3,499. Generac emergency Automatic Automatic . Standby generators are cheaper than Generac ERAC Emergency Automatic Home
 I said screw it and bought an Onan RSI 5000, expensive at half the price . The Onan is now an expensive Onan, but half the cost of the Onan .
 We’ll put the propane and water behind the shed and the generator in a little room off the access to the shelter . The propane, water and propane will be put in a small room behind a shed .
 Knowing how things work in the real world, maybe I’d better go for a 1,700-gallon cistern . Maybe I'd better . Maybe it’s not a cistern.
 "I can put a gray water holding tank under the floor of the shelter and pump it to the sewer," she says . The shelter's owner says she hopes to use the gray water tank to pump water into the sewer .
 'Once I get everything done, I have about 5,655ft 3 of dirt I have to get hauled off,' he says . 'I have to haul off about five,000ft of dirt,' he adds .
 That’s what happens when you get old and your memory occasionally works . That's what happens to you when you're old and you get older .
 I replaced a chemical toilet with a regular toilet and a wastewater holding tank with a sewage pump . I replaced the chemical toilet . The toilet was replaced with a toilet and the wastewater holding . A sewage pump was installed on the toilet .
 'Anytime anyone doesn’t do it the way she thinks it should be done, she argues with them,' she says . 'She argued with them. Anytime anyone . doesn‘t do something she thinks is wrong,’ she says. ‘She argues
 I doubt that a Volcano will erupt in the middle of the La Brea Tar Pits . I doubt a volcano will erupt .
 Of all the things that could happen, nuclear war and an earthquake are the most likely things to happen . Nuclear war and earthquake are most likely so far as California is concerned .
 I’m not so sure China would attack, that would really screw up their Wal-Mart contract . I'm so sure that China would .
 The avian flu, H5N1, seems to be the topic of the moment. You know what I think I think is the topic for the moment, says CNN.com .
 It was those guys over there that do all of the offshore technical support and their neighbors. "It's those guys ... who do all the offshore tech support," he said .
 What’s his name had the technical service contract for 50 different U.S. firms . He had technical service contracts for . 50 different United States firms .
 He says they have a problem that will be fixed, when it’s fixed . Actually, he can’t; he can't; he says they’ll be fixed .
 It can’t be a fire; it’s a stupendous fire with smoke billowing twice as high as the build is tall . Smoke billowing from the building is twice as tall as it is tall as a fire . The fire is a 'stup
 Here’s this gal standing under a streetlight explaining the accident that happened 6 hours earlier . Here's this woman standing under the streetlight .
 The fire department explained how they would handle the fire . Then they interviewed a guy with the fire department who explained how it would handle it .
 We talked about having a disaster drill, but decided it wasn’t worth the effort . We decided not to do it, but it was not worth it .
 "If a disaster happened, everyone would grab their checkbooks and guns and boogie over to my house," she says . "Everyone would grab checkbooks, guns and go over to me," she adds .
 Very little maintenance is needed to keep your MIA MIA in superb condition . The MIA MIA is an award-winning photo-referred MIA .
 This is especially true with National Match and Super Match rifles, whose actions are glass bedded in their stocks . National Match rifles are glass-bedded rifles, and their actions are often glassed .
 Unnecessary removal promotes wear, sloppy fit, inaccuracy and defeats the purpose of the bedding . Bedding should not be removed from bedding as it promotes wear and is not necessary to remove it .
 Please do not field strip your match rifle unless it is absolutely necessary . Please strip your rifle before you use it for any reason .
 I 21 read all of the things I wasn’t supposed to do and wondered if I dare shoot the gun . I 21 didn't think I would ever shoot a gun, but decided to do it anyway .
 I wrapped up a belt in an envelope and mailed it to Kirkpatrick Leather Company in Laredo, Texas . I wrapped it up in a box and sent it to the leather company .
 I told them I had 2 Berretta Stampedes, one with a 714” barrel for a right side draw and a 4 3 /4” model for the crossdraw . I told the owners I had two Berrettas, one of which has a 7
 'They called me and I gave them my debit card number and they said I’d have the leather in a week. They called me to give them my . debit card . They said they would have the . leather in the next week .
 "You added 12 bullets plus the weight of the holsters and you were really loaded down," he said . "Then you added 12 . bullets plus . the weight . of the . holsters," he added .
 After you put cartridges in the cartridge belt, you almost needed suspenders or a bigger butt than I have . After putting cartridges into the belt, the cartridges almost required suspenders . The cartridge belt was almost impossible to use without a belt .
 "Always had trouble wearing cowboy leather because my waist was as big as the bottom end. Always had trouble ... because of the size of my waist," he says .
 Sam Browne to the rescue, Sam Browne added suspenders and called them shoulder straps . There was a solution to the problem, with the help of Sam Browne .
 On Saturday morning address to the nation, he mentioned what was happening and then put in a plug for extending the troops in Iraq for another year . He mentioned what he was doing in the address .
 "I told Ron that Derek was sending me the rifle in pieces, but it was Mary, Derek was Over There," she says . "Derek was over there. He was over There. He sent it in pieces. It was Mary."
 "I had a 55-gallon drum that I was filling with gasoline, 5 gallons at a time," she says . "I was filling up 5 gallons a time. I had to fill it up," she said .
 "I figured that 55-gallons of gas would get us from here to there, wherever that was," she says . "We were going to get us to there," she adds .
 With a full tank and 55 spare gallons, we could get about 1,675 miles from Palmdale . We could go about 1.675 miles with a full full tank .
 They said that this vaccine had 2 A stains and one other strain, so we could hope . The vaccine has two A stains, one strain, and one strain of another .
 There are 16 different HA subtypes and 9 different NA subtypes of flu A viruses . The flu A virus has 16 different subtypes: HA subtype and NA subtype .
 When we talk about “bird flu” viruses, we are referring to those flu A subtypes that continue to occur mainly in birds . However, when talking about bird flu viruses we are talking about those flu subtypes .
 When we talk about ‘human flu viruses’ we are referring to those subtypes that occur widely in humans . We're referring to subtypes of human flu viruses that are common in humans, such as the flu virus .
 There are only three known subtypes of human flu viruses (HI N1, HI N2, and H3N2) It is likely that some genetic parts of current human flu A viruses came from birds originally .
 Flu A viruses are constantly changing, and they might adapt over time to infect and spread among humans . Flu A virus is constantly changing and might adapt to infect humans .
 There currently is no vaccine to protect humans against the H5N1 virus that is being seen in Asia . There is currently no vaccine for humans to protect against the virus . The virus has been circulating in Asia since September .
 Research studies to test a vaccine to protect humans against H5N1 virus began in April 2005 .
 Ayman al-Zawahiri is number the #2 guy in al Qaeda . He was formerly the head of the Egyptian Islamic Jihad paramilitary organization . He is number two in the organization .
 Abu Musab al-Zarqawi is a Sunni Jordanian insurgent . He is the leader of al Qaeda in Iraq . He has been in contact with al Qaeda leaders in Jordan .
 Al-Zarqawi’s real name is believed to be Ahmad Fadeel al-Nazal al-Khalayleh . He was believed to have lived in Syria .
 Like other cults, members are persuaded to give up their own lives for the promise of a paradise beyond . Jim Jones’ People's Temple, the Heavens Gate sect or the Order of the Solar Temple, is one of the cults .
 This technique was used a millennium ago by Hassan I Sabbah, a mystic, alchemist and master terrorist on whom bin Laden probably models himself . The technique is used by a master terrorist and a mystic .
 Hassan's Order of Assassins was made up of suicide killers with poisoned daggers . Hassan believed that their leader had the key to the gates of Heaven . Hassan's order of Assassins believed that he was the leader of the group .
 Assassins transformed the act of murder into a system directed against Seljuk Muslim rulers that had been persecuting their sect . The Assassins were largely directed against rulers that were persecuting the Muslim sect .
 They were careful to cultivate their reputation by slaying their victims in public, often in mosques . They were meticulous in killing the targeted individual, seeking to do so without any additional casualties and innocent loss of life .
 Attackers rejected poison, bows and other weapons that allowed the attacker to escape . Typically they approached using a disguise; their weapon of choice a dagger .
 "Our goal is to prevent regimes that sponsor terror from threatening America or our friends and allies with weapons of mass destruction," says Obama .
 Viruses cannot “live” or reproduce without getting inside some living cell, whether it's a plant, animal, or bacteria . Viruses can’t ‘live or reproduce’ without getting into some living cells .
 An alcohol molecule is 0.96 picometers in length, and a picometer is 1/1000 of a nanometer . Alcohol molecules in alcohol molecules are less than 1 million nanometers long .
 He couldn't stay; he and Linda were going over to Fess Parker’s vineyard . He couldn’t stay: He and Linda went to the vineyard to visit Fess .
 At the time he was famous for his Davy Crockett and Daniel Boone roles, French distributors found they had to rename him on posters, in TV programmers... for the French audience .
 The advantage to the MIA is that it’s almost legal the way I have mine configured . The advantage is that the way it's almost legal is almost legal to use .
 As long as I don’t show off the 20-round magazines, no one will give me any trouble, I hope. I hope . I don't want to show off off the magazines, he says . I hope it will be easy for him to do so, he
 Loaded model MIA rifle purchased through straw women in Arkansas . The 3 of us came to each have one of the rifles . The rifle was purchased by straw women .
 It was beginning to seem like a waste of time and money, no one nuked the U.S. and we hadn’t invaded Iran, yet, yet. No one nukes the United States and no one has invaded Iran .
 Both Clarence and Clarence got the flu after getting flu shots . Clarence and I got the regular flu after we’d gotten flu shots. To top it off, both Clarence and me got flu shots after getting regular flu .
 You could put anything you wanted in the freezer, but it had to be enough to feed 20 people . Our rule of thumb was that we should only have enough for 20 people in a freezer .
 If we had to somehow squeeze in Clarence’s kids, we’d make room and slice the meat a lot thinner . We’ll make room for Clarence and his kids, but we'd slice it thinner .
 Still, it was racing season and the radios had new batteries and were ready to go . Still, the radios still had batteries on them, but they were ready for racing .
 I have seen the pictures of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, I have to wonder if anyone would win a war between India and Pakistan . I have also wondered if a war would be won by India, Pakistan would win .
 Neither country had mastered fusion and their bombs and warheads were about 20kt, max, max . Neither country ever mastered fusion .
 Dennis Hopper doesn’t think the U.S. would invade Iran because of the terrain . Hopper says the terrain of Iran is more difficult to invade because of its terrain . The E-Ring has been following Hopper’s lead in the past week .
 It appears that they aren’t going to continue the show, it’s shown as ‘complete’ at IMDb.com, but the monster shows are doing fine .
 The Little Boy design was used only once as a weapon because of the extreme danger of a misfire . Although used occasionally in later experimental devices, the design was only used once in a weapon . The design was later used in experimental devices .
 A simple crash could drive the ""bullet"" into the ""target"" and release lethal radiation doses or even a full nuclear detonation . A single crash could release deadly radiation doses .
 If water entered the fail safe system, it would be shorted out, possibly leading to a detonation of the bomb . Even if the force of a crash did not set the bomb off, it could set off the bomb itself .
 "We were in a hurry to get everything done, but we were getting older and moving slower," she says . "We're getting older, moving slower. We were in the hurry," she adds .
 "Our hearts were in it, including Ron and Clarence’s worn out and repaired hearts, 28 but the bodies didn’t cooperate."
 There were also those ladders and we concluded that we all use the pet basket, one at a time . There was also a pet basket and the ladders, one of which were also ladders .
 The only problem with that was that the war would be over before we all made it in the shelter. "The only problem would be that it would be ... over before ... we all got in there," she said. "I don't think we're going to get out of the
 "I suspected that when the announcement came on TV, Chris and Patti, Dick, Dave and Lance would show up with their families looking for a room for a couple of weeks," says Bob Greene . Greene .
 The air filter was rated at 50 people and we’d still have 10ft 2 apiece with 50 people . The filter would still be rated at 10 ft 2 each with 50. The filter is rated at . 50 people.
 Lance had been a Special Forces officer in Vietnam; he’d be good to have on our side . Lance had served in Vietnam and was a Vietnam veteran . Lance was good to be on the side of the U.S.
 Chris didn't own any guns and I figured that if any of them did, it would be Dick and Lance . I didn’t think that either of them hunted, but I didn't think that neither of them would hunt . Chris and Lance had no guns and Chris didn�
 Clarence thought the rifle was awful loud and I told him to buy a muffler . Clarence thought it was too loud and told him he should buy a bigger muffler. Clarence thought he was going to get it .
 "We had the pattern for the adapter and the muffler and Dave had the lathe. Now we had to design the adapter," he says . "Now we had the patterns for the adapters and muffler," he adds .
 Clarence let Dave dismantle it and draw patterns with all the measurements with all of the measurements . Clarence and Dave let Dave build it up and create patterns .
 He said if the world ever ended, he’d think about the mufflers but he could machine the adapters now so we could install them on our rifles . The adapters are machine-made now, he said .
 "I suspected when he got bored, he’d probably make the mufflers, just to see if he could," he said . "He’s probably making mufflers just to try and make them," he added .
 Dave said he’d figure it out and have all of the metal supplies he needed . Dave said it was a good thing for him to have all the metal he needed.
 For the next week or two, I noticed the light on in Dave’s garage late at night . The light went on in the garage for the next two weeks .
 He has the biggest collection of dirt bikes I’ve ever seen, at least 20 and possibly as many as 30 . He has a collection of about 30 dirt bikes .
 Dick's garage is filled with lumber of every size, shape and description . Dick’s garage is full of lumber .
 He has a table saw, radial arm saw, drill press and drill press . He has lots of carpentry equipment . He also has a drill press, table saw and other tools .
 Chris’s garage looks like an auto repair shop because of his constant building and repairing his race car . Chris's garage is full of cars that he builds and repairs .
 The Mig welder is a welder, sheet metal brakes, grinders and all that stuff . He has a lot of knowledge about how to build a car .
 "Amongst those 3 neighbors, we had the capability to build about anything we wanted. Amongst those three neighbors, it was the capability of building about anything you wanted," says author .
 Dick was sort of a jack-of-all-trades, installing gas piping for the gas company . Dick was a jack of all kinds, installing pipes for the company .
 This was, in some ways, the perfect blue-collar neighborhood . I hadn’t planned it that way, but this was the perfect place to live in .
 I tried to make friends with the couple who bought Dan and Dawn’s house, but they preferred to hang with the wetbacks in the house between Chris and Chris and me . The couple's house was bought by the couple, who bought the house in 2008 .
 The Country of Mexico thought that California, Arizona, New Mexico and Texas we still part of that country, they had more of their population north of the border than south . The country of Mexico obviously thought that . California was part of the country .
 Ours had started out the typical multi-ethnic California neighborhood in 1987 . Ours started out of the typical mult-ethnic neighborhood in the 1980s .
 "The way these things went, eventually the neighborhoods went Hispanic or black and ours was Hispanic. The way we went, we went Hispanic. We didn't want to see what was going to be Hispanic. It was Hispanic, it was black, it wasn't Hispanic."
 The Hispanics couldn’t afford the houses at the prices they were going for so they sublet . The Hispanics were subletting the homes at the homes they couldn't afford . The subletions are often sub-hilarious .
 The 29 house between Chris and Chris seemed to be more of an apartment house with a constantly changing group of people . The house was more of a 'house' than a '29 house' with a 'constant changing' group of friends .
 I’m explaining, not complaining, one of these days, we’d have our disaster and it might be open season . I'm explaining not complaining. One of this days, it’s been open season. It might be like open season, he says .
 The Pakistani Meteorological Department put the magnitude at 7.5, and Japan's Meteorological Agency put it at a 7.8 . The magnitude of the earthquake in Pakistan was 7.4, the highest in Japan .
 In January 2001, some 30,000 people died in a magnitude 7.2 quake in western India . In January 2011, 30,500 people were killed in a quake that struck western India, killing more than 100,000 .
 Legislation would mandate alcohol tests any time a boat is involved in a fatal accident . Legislation would also mandate alcohol testing any time boat was involved in an accident . The legislation would also require alcohol tests for boat crashes .
 I told him that he’d better leave them with me, they were illegal and I didn’t want him to get in trouble,’s wife says . ‘I told him he'd better leave him with me. I didn't want him in trouble.
 Surefire suppressors are made of super-secret aerospace metal that Surefire uses in their suppressors . Surefire's suppressors can be fired through the mufflers and rear baffle .
 "Late at night, I could go out and shoot the rifle and no one would be any the wiser," he says . But late at night he could go for a late-night shoot with no one else .
 "I didn't know if Ron and Clarence had done any night practice, but as quiet as the rifle was, they could have," he said . "I'm not sure if Ron or Clarence did any night practices," he added .
 "We talked about it, as much as anyone who was in Vietnam was willing to talk about it," says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "We were able to find a way to get around the world to get to Vietnam" Sutter says he hopes to
 Although often quoted and stated this phrase doesn’t come from the Bible nor is even Biblical in origin . This phrase is often quoted as a reference to the Bible . However, it is not Bible-related .
 At last he came to a part of the road where the wheels sank halfway into the mire, and the more the horses pulled, the deeper sank the wheels . The more horses pulled the wheels, the more they pulled the more sank them .
 The Waggoner threw down his whip, and knelt down and prayed to Hercules the Strong . So the waggoner was able to get his whip down and pray .
 He didn't want me to be offended so he called and explained about the clique that exists in every Methodist Church, generally, the Country Club Set who sort of look down their noses at we mere mortals .
 For a while I attended the First Church of the Open Bible in Des Moines, Iowa . For a time, I attended a church of the open Bible in Iowa .
 They should change their name to the First Church of the Open Hypocrites . The church should change its name to 'The Open Hypocrrites'
 Once you join the Methodist Church, they carry you on their rolls until someone tells them you’re dead or you officially resign . The Methodist Church carries your rolls until you're dead or resign .
 The clique to end all cliques is Grace United Methodist Church in Des Moines, Iowa . The church is a Methodist church in the state of Iowa .
 You rub elbows with Iowa Supreme Court Judges, high ranking public officials and it goes way beyond the Country Club Set . Iowa's highest court judges and other public officials are also involved .
 I didn’t transfer my membership to another Methodist Church until 1997 . I didn't transfer membership to a new Methodist church until 1997, she says .
 "They should have left me alone, I rarely get mad, but I always get even," she says . "I don't get mad. They should have . Left me alone," she writes .
 Getting even is an active, not a passive act and there is more than one way to skin a cat . Don’t you believe it, that’s only true if you’re getting even is getting even, not just getting even .
 If the theater is on fire and it’s filled with those folks from south of the border, they probably wouldn’t understand if you yelled ‘Fire’ when you saw it . The theater is filled with people from South America .
 North Korea tested a nuclear weapon and the United States moved the Pacific Fleet to the southern Sea of Japan . The U.S. Pacific Fleet was moved to the south Sea, Japan .
 Recent developments in the western Pacific have forced me to deploy all of our Pacific Naval assets, says President Obama .
 Half of our carrier forces are moving to the East China Sea to aid Taiwan in its time of need . As I speak, half of our carriers are moving .
 During the summer of 2004 the Navy surged some aircraft carriers from their homeports ...to generate as many as seven of 12 carriers on station .
 "The ability to push that kind of military capability to the four corners of the world is quite remarkable and recent," says President Obama .
 Through this series of deployments, surge operations and exercises, the Navy will demonstrate and exercise a new approach to operations and maintenance . The U.S. Navy will deploy and exercise new approaches to operations .
 Changes have been made in an effort to improve our capacity to deploy the fleet, says CNN.com .
 We currently have 8 Carrier Strike Groups deployed, 2 will be ready in 30 days and the remaining 2 in 90 days or less . 2 of the 8 carriers are ready within 30 days of deployment .
 I cannot and will not remove the 2 Carrier Strike Groups from the Middle East as they are supporting our ongoing effort on the War on Terror, says President Obama . The two carrier strike groups are supporting the ongoing effort against terror .
 I have ordered the remaining carriers to accelerate their plans to deploy . 2 additional groups will be at sea within 2 weeks and the other 2 within 45 days . The remaining carriers are expected to be deployed within the next two weeks .
 There remains no easy way to increase the number of carriers deployed with the Pacific Fleet . The U.S. Navy has no plans to increase carrier numbers .
 The 2 groups deploying in the near term will replace those in the Middle East and when relieved, they will deploy to the Pacific . When relieved, the 2 groups will be deployed to the region .
 The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country . But he that stands it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman, writes CNN.com's John Sutter .
 Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph, we will triumph . "Tyranny is like hell. Tyranny is not easy to conquer," he said .
 If called upon to prevail against the North Koreans and the Chinese, we shall. We shall. If we are called upon, we will. We will prevail against North Korea and China, says President Obama . We will.
 This is not a war against Muslims, it is a war for all who would destroy our way of life, says President Obama . Obama: "We are not fighting Muslims but we are fighting for our way to life"
 "As far as your country is concerned, it would be difficult to say even in general terms what this would have meant for them," he says . "It would be hard to say what this means for them"
 "In the first place, your country would have been burned in the fire of war," says President Obama . "I don't want to see your country burn in a fire of fire," says Obama .
 "There's no doubt that your people would have fought courageously or that they would have died heroically," says President Obama . "There is no doubt," says Obama. "There are no doubt" that the U.S. troops would have been brave and heroic .
 Castro wrote him a letter complaining about the Soviet Union caving in to Kennedy . Castro wrote the letter to Kennedy complaining that the U.S. caved in on Kennedy .
 The launch occurred July 20, 1960, off Cape Canaveral, Florida, off the coast of Florida . Within three hours a second Polaris test missile was launched .
 On November 15, 1960, the submarine and its 16 Polaris Als began the first patrol . The submarine began its first patrol in November 1960 . It was the first submarine to carry out a patrol .
 The first successful submerged launch of the Polaris A2 came from the USS Ethan Allen on 23 October 1961 off the Florida coast . The first success of the A2 submersible launch was launched from the USS Ethan Allen .
 POLARIS A2 began its initial operational patrol when the USS Ethan Allen departed Charleston, South Carolina, on 26 June 1962 .
 Trident II D-5 is the sixth generation member of the U.S. Navy's Fleet Ballistic Missile program . The program started in 1956 and is now in its sixth generation .
 Trident I was designed to the same dimensions as the Poseidon missile it replaced . Trident II is a little larger than its predecessor, the Trident I .
 The Trident II D-5 is a three-stage, solid propellant, inertially guided FBM with a range of more than 4,000 nautical miles . Trident II is more sophisticated with a significantly greater payload capability .
 All three stages of the Trident II are made of lighter, stronger, stiffer graphite epoxy . The integrated structure mean considerable weight savings .
 The missile's range is increased by the aerospike, a telescoping outward extension that reduces frontal drag by about 50 percent . The missile has a range of range that can be increased by a telescoped outward extension .
 Trident II is fired by the pressure of expanding gas in the launch tube . Trident II was fired by an expanding gas inside the rocket's tube .
 When the missile attains sufficient distance from the submarine, the first stage motor ignites, the aerospike extends and the boost stage begins . The boost stage of the missile begins when the missile reaches sufficient distance .
 Within two minutes, after the third stage motor kicks in, the missile is traveling in excess of 20,000 feet per second . Within about two minutes of the launch, after about two .
 The ten Trident submarines in the Atlantic fleet were initially equipped with the D-5 Trident II missile . The missiles were initially used by the Trident II missiles .
 Eight submarines in the Pacific were initially equipped with the C-4 Trident I missile . The eight submarines were initially armed with the missile .
 In 1996 the Navy started to back fit the eight submarines in the Pacific to carry the D-5 missile . The Navy has eight submarines that can carry the missile .
 We have 14 SSBNs, each equipped with 24 missiles and 8 warheads per missile, 2,688 warheads . The U.S. has 14 SSNs equipped with missiles and warheads, each with 24 missile warheads .
 Minuteman III and Peacekeeper Missiles, anywhere from 1,000 to 2,000 warheads, are among the weapons of choice . The Peacekeepers Missiles are also known as 'Peacekeepers' Missiles .
 "In terms of sheer power, we’d win. On top of that, we have the . B-52s, the B-1 Bs and the fighter aircraft that can deliver B-61," he says . "We'd win. In terms of . sheer
 Check telephone numbers in family emergency plan and update as necessary . Check phone numbers in emergency plan, update them necessary .
 Continue to be alert for suspicious activity and report it to authorities . Report it to police .
 Review your family emergency plan and make sure all family members know what to do . Review your emergency plan for the first time .
 Expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions at public buildings . Expect some airport delays and baggage searches .
 Check on neighbors or others that might need assistance in an emergency . Check on others who might need help in the wake of an emergency.
 DEFCON 5 Normal peacetime readiness . Normal, increased intelligence and strengthened security measures . Increased force readiness above normal readiness . Further increase in force readiness .
 Major attack upon United States forces overseas, or allied forces in any area, is confirmed by the commander of a unified or specified command or higher authority .
 Air defense emergency is an emergency condition declared by the Commander in Chief, North American Aerospace Defense Command . The North American Air Defense Command is based in Washington, D.C. and New York .
 You can store all or some of your weapons in the cabinet in the shelter . Now, if you want, you can store them in your shelter .
 I’ll give both of you a 37 key to the shelter entrance and the gun cabinet I have down there . I'll also give you a key to a 37-key key to my gun cabinet, I say .
 China is qualitatively and quantitatively improving its strategic missile force . China is improving its missile force, experts say . The country's missile force is now the world's largest in the world .
 This could provide a credible, survivable nuclear deterrent and counterstrike capability . The U.S. could use this to provide a reliable and survivable deterrent, say experts .
 It is fielding more survivable missiles capable of targeting India, Russia, virtually all of the U.S. and the Asia-Pacific Theater as far south as Australia and New Zealand . It is also targeting India and Russia, Russia and virtually all the United States .
 China will also maintain a force of nuclear-armed CSS-5 MRBMs for regional contingencies . China also maintains force of force of CSS-4-Ms for region contingencies.
 China deploys approximately twenty silo-based, liquid-propellant CSS-4 ICBMs, which constitute its primary nuclear deterrent . China currently deploys approximately twenty silos-based substantial substitutions of the CSS-4 
 The Second Artillery also maintains approximately twenty liquid-fueled, more limited-range CSS-3 ICBMs to sustain its regional nuclear deterrent . The Second Air Force also maintains about twenty liquid fuel-fed, less-limited-range, limited range CSS-2ICBMs
 The Second Artillery will likely keep this older missile in service until it is replaced by the more survivable, road-mobile DF-31 . The Second . Artillery is likely to keep it in service for a time .
 China supplements the aged CSS-2s with solid propellant, road-mobile CSS-5 MRBMs . The CSS-3s are now being used to refuel the CSS-4s and CSS-6s . China is also developing a new generation of CSS 5 MRB
 DF-31-class missiles will be able to operate over a larger area, making them more difficult to locate and neutralize . The mobility of the new missiles will enable these systems to operate . The new missiles can be tracked down to a large area, the Pentagon says .
 The introduction of a new generation of SLBMs on China’s new ballistic-missile submarine will provide an additional survivable nuclear option . The introduction .
 CSS-4 Mod 1 replaced with the longer-range, longer range CSS 4 Mod 2 . The move to mobile, solid-fueled systems will enhance the operational capabilities and survivability of China's strategic missile force .
 The law’s passage followed months of speculation by outside observers over its contents . Chinese officials have cast the law in benign terms, while closely guarding the draft of the text .
 The law itself is broken into ten articles that codify, or render as legal instruments, policies and statements applied by the Chinese government to the Taiwan question . The articles are broken into 10 articles that provide legal instruments and policies .
 Article Five reiterates China’s position that acceptance of “One China” is a necessary pre-condition for peaceful resolution . Article Five: Acceptance of "One China" is a prerequisite for peace in China .
 Article Six enumerates the steps Beijing is willing to take to realize peaceful unification . It includes expanding cross-Strait exchanges, including cultural, economic, educational, science and technology, health, and sports exchanges .
 It also refers to ‘other activities’ conducive to peace and stability, but does not offer details . The document refers to "other activities" that are conducive to stability, it says .
 Article Seven specifies the range of issues that would be subject to negotiation during cross-Strait consultations . Article seven specifies the issues that are subject to negotiations .
 Article Eight states the State Council and CMC “must decide on and execute” nonpeaceful means to “protect China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity” Article Eight says it will protect China's sovereignty if “secessionist forces . . .cause the
 Article Nine provides that during conflict, China will “exert its utmost” to protect lives, property, and rights of Taiwan civilians and foreign nationals on Taiwan, and the rights of Taiwanese citizens in other parts of China .
 Article Ten specifies that the law comes into force on the day of its proclamation . Article Ten says that the new law will come into force when it is proclaimed . Article 10 says that a law must be in force by the day it is declared .
 PLA theorists are aware of the electromagnetic effects of using a high-altitude nuclear burst . Some PLA theorists might consider using HEMP as an unconventional attack, believing the United States and other nations would not interpret it as a use of force .
 This capability would most likely be used as part of a larger campaign to intimidate, if not decapitate, the Taiwan leadership . The capability would be used to intimidate or decapitate the country's leadership .
 HEMP causes a substantial change in the ionization of the upper atmosphere, including the ionosphere and magnetosphere . HEMP is a major change in ionizing of the atmosphere .
 These effects likely would result in the degradation of important war fighting capabilities, such as key communication links, radar transmissions, and the full spectrum of electro-optic sensors . These effects would affect key communication and radar transmissions .
 Additional effects could include severe disruptions to civil electric/power and transportation . Additional disruptions could include disruptions to transportation and civil electric and power .
 These effects cannot easily be localized to Taiwan and would likely affect the mainland, Japan, the Philippines, and commercial shipping and air routes in the region . The effects would likely also affect the Philippines and the Philippines .
 It's a copy of The Military Power of the People’s Republic of China 2005 . It’ll be published in China's first edition of the book, published in 2005 .
 If China believes that Taiwan will secede, they’ll attack, says CNN’s John Defterios . ‘Those are some of the key points and if China believes they will attack them,’ he says. ‘If they believe they will se
 They have the entire ocean between the mainland and Taiwan under a missile umbrella . The entire ocean is under the missile umbrella, the U.S. government says .
 Even if they don’t attack this country directly, we’re likely to see them use a series of HEMPs .
 A room coated with metal foil allowed high-voltage discharges from an electrostatic generator to strike outside of the room .
 Electroscope used to show there was no electric charge on the inside of the room's walls . He used an electroscope to show that there were no electric charges on the walls .
 I’d connected all of the pieces of sheet metal with pieces of cooper grounding mesh, which I had connected to one of my grounding rods . I'd connected each piece of metal to a piece of cooper grounded mesh .
 For the next few days, I stayed up each night until 5am and slept until 1pm . For the rest of the week, I went to bed at 5am each night and slept 1pm.
 "People were going in and out all night. I’m telling you, those people next door must have a motel,” she said . ‘I’ve got a motel in the house,’ she said.
 Chris’s radios were in a metal case in a cabinet, his truck, and should be well protected on the off chance that EMP hit us, he says .
 His generator was also mounted in the truck so it would likely survive too . His generator is also mounted inside the truck .
 I was holding chapter 3 until I felt justified in posting chapter 4 . Since I only had 2 comments, I was held back until I was justified to post chapter 4. Since I had only 2 comments I only posted chapter 3 .
 I also read all of the comments hoping that when I got tired of a story or ran out of ideas, I could find and excuse to slide the cabins off into the canyon, like in Big John . "Big John" is the name of Big John, who was killed in
 I’d given up proofreading more than a couple of times because if I missed an error twice, I was sure someone else would find it and send me an email . I was so tired of proofreading that I had given up .
 "I really liked the 1am to 5am shift and could get a lot written if I didn’t get too foggy in the head. I really liked it," she says .
 "I had to take those at least 20 minutes before I ate to protect my stomach," she said . She said she had to wait 20 minutes to eat .
 Plavix worked but costs $4 a pill, about the price of a pack of smokes . The pill is about to cost $4 per pill, but it's not the same price of cigarettes .
 You could tell if it was a fire truck from the diesel engine and that darned horn, but the cops and the ambulances all sounded the same . The cops and ambulances are the same.
 Berkeley TV rigged up with a 3-4” screen to keep an eye on the late night news .
 Unlike when I’d gotten sick in 2003, I was getting a full night sleep and my health was holding up just fine for an 80-year-old man . Unlike when he'd gotten sick, he was able to sleep .
 Of course I wouldn't be 63 until my next birthday, but it didn't matter. Of course, it didn’t matter. It didn't mean that I would be 63 when I turned 63 .
 "We finally gotten me a wheelchair ramp for the front door and the patio door" "I decided to just leave the wheelchair in the house unless I could make it work with my computer/radio table" "We decided to leave it out"
 Ron bought a couple of the 8’ folding tables and Clarence a few folding chairs that looked like they come from the Palmdale Group . Clarence bought a few of the tables and chairs . Ron bought them for $100 .
 Aside from the one time we’d fired our Ml As, we hadn’t bother to go back to a range . We hadn't bothered to bother to shoot at a range.
 I’d shot out the streetlight on the other side of 47th a couple of times, usually within a mag41 azine of ammo . The streetlight was shot out on 47th by a gunman .
 I did it so I could learn the gun and get used to cleaning it and clearing any malfunctions. "I did it because I wanted to learn," he says .
 "I had one magazine with 20 rounds all of the time and the other with ten," he says . He says he used to have two magazines with 10 rounds a day and one with 20 .
 I had some stripper clips off the net and an adapter so I could probably load the other 19 in 5-10 minutes . The other 19 clips were taken from the net, and the adapter is an adapter .
 "I was debating buying one of those loaders they sell but they were some kind of plastic and I was getting a really bad attitude about plastic," says the author of the book .
 I got the MIA with the black fiberglass stock because it was cheaper and hopefully lighter . I got it for the first time because it's cheaper and lighter than the other .
 Santa Fe Gun Galleria had told me they had several of the fiberglass stocks and I should buy the rifle with the walnut stock and he’d give me one . I'd forgotten that the guy at Santa Fe . Galleria .
 Derek had Rambo II and Rambo III would take a month of grinding to get the top sharp . He was right and I started sharpening Rambo I. Derek was right, he was right .
 The nights passed quickly and I managed to get Rambo one as sharp as it had ever been . Sitting there writing, researching at others, keeping an eye on the motel next door .
 "It took a while to get the top to the point where I could start using the stone. That was some hard steel and it took a long time to get to the top," he said .
 "Once they had the top sharp, I could take the stone and really get it sharp," he says . "I could really get the stone sharp. Once they had been sharp, they had to be sharp. That's what they need to do to get the best out of the
 It has a compass on top and a hollow handle with some survival equipment . It has been designed to help people survive in survival situations .
 "I may sharpen this one up and carry 2 knives, one for everyday use and one for fighting," he says . "One of these knives is a knife that I may use to sharpen up and use for fighting."
 Damon is ok, but he’s so focused on his being bi-polar, he is essentially worthless to himself and others . Damon is focused on being a bi-patroler, he's essentially worthless .
 I’m almost convinced that if the Chinese attack, they use HEMP and not bother with anything else else . I'm almost convinced . if the . Chinese attack on HEMP, they would not bother to bother to use anything else .
 About the only circumstance that would require an extended stay in the shelter would be a hit on LA, Plant 42 or Diablo Canyon .
 If the Chinese are going to do anything, they’re doing it within the next 2 weeks, he says . The Chinese are likely to do it in the next two weeks .
 I could be wrong, but I’m guessing that those Groups will steam at 35knots or about 40mph . I'm guessing that they'll steam at around 40mph, or 35mph .
 It’s about 3,850 miles from Norfolk to Gibraltar and 2,250 miles from Gibraltar to Port Said .
 Assuming the other two carriers depart when they reach Port Said, they can be in the East China Sea in less than a week . It’s only about 4,100 miles or 102 hours steaming 44 time .
 If I were running this operation, I’d blockade the Straits of Malacca with a couple of l-class Los Angeles subs . I'd blockade the straits with a pair of Los Angeles sub .
 It might take 3 to put a tanker down quickly, but one should be enough to blow it up and start an uncontainable fire . "It might take three to put it down quickly," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 It was going to be close; there were more cases of H5N1 in Europe and Indonesia . There were also more cases in Europe, Indonesia and Europe, but not Indonesia .
 What he had said was that he wouldn’t be going where he first thought, the distance was the same but it would be in the direction they all prayed to . The distance is the same as the distance they first thought .
 The American CSGs were staying just outside of the protective missile umbrella the Chinese had installed to protect the ocean between the mainland and Taiwan . The U.S. CSGs stayed just outside the umbrella .
 The Taiwan Strait connected the South China Sea to the East China Sea . They called the place the Taiwan Strait . It was called Taiwan Strait and it connected the S.C. sea to the north .
 The area south of Taiwan was the Luzon Strait and the ocean to the east was the Philippine Sea . The area to the west was the Philippines Sea, and the area south was Taiwan .
 The Chinese had been firing missiles on Taiwan for about a week, apparently trying to soften the island before attacking . Taiwan had been hit by the missiles in recent days .
 Most of the missiles they had deployed could barely reach Taiwan and were intended, I presume, to only protect the Strait . Most of these missiles were intended to protect Taiwan .
 They had a supply of larger missiles purchased from Russia with convention warheads and were using those against Taipei . They had been using those from Russia .
 China had a lot of the solid-fueled, road-mobile DF-31 missiles, which the DIA had said would have initial operational capability in 2005-06 . The DIA said the missiles would be operational in 2005/06 .
 When the intelligence agencies replaced Humint with Elint, they screwed the pooch . The intelligence agencies changed Humint to Elint . Humint was replaced by Elint.
 The Chinese had satellites of their own and were perfectly capable of tracking American and Russian satellites . The Chinese were able to track U.S. and Russia satellites in the past .
 China is upgrading all classes of its nuclear ballistic missiles, both quantitatively and qualitatively . China is currently upgrading all classifications of its ballistic missiles .
 Beijing intends this program to improve its nuclear deterrence by increasing the number of warheads that can target the United States . Beijing plans to augment the nuclear force’s operational capabilities for contingencies in East Asia .
 There is also evidence showing that China is developing the MIRV capability for the DF-31 A and JL-2 to improve their strike capabilities . China is also developing the capabilities of the DF 31 A and the JL 2 .
 DF-4 was reported upgraded to 8,000-10,000km range under the name of CZ-1D space launch vehicle project . The 7,000 km-range DF-3 was reported to have been upgraded to 10,000k range .
 The improved missile is said to have been deployed in ‘ready-to-launch’ status in silos . The improved missiles are said to be in “ready to launch” status .
 Early reports suggested that China may only have about 20 DF-4s, 25 DF-5s, and several DF-31s . However, some other sources indicated that by 2000 the PLA Second Artillery Corps could have deployed eight ICBM brigades . The total number of I
 The JL-2 is believed to also have MIRV warheads . It is thought to have an estimated range of 8,000km and has a range of 9,500km .
 This would allow the submarine to strike America and Europe from waters close to Chinese coasts . The submarine would be able to strike U.S. and Europe close to China's coasts .
 DF-31 A ICBMs wouldn’t be deployed until 2007-09, and sea-based JL-2 SLBMs would be deployed in 2008-10 . The same people who generated the DODs report suggested that the range of 10,GOO12,
 Report was withheld until July 2005 . No explanation was given for the delay . Report was released in 2005 .
 The WTC Commission said that that disaster was the fault of the intelligence agencies . The World Trade Center Commission has said that the disaster was not the fault .
 Katrina Commission to learn why a hurricane had devastated New Orleans and the Gulf Coast . They were still arguing over whether or not to have a Katrina Commission .
 Louisiana didn't want the money spent on levees capable of protecting New Orleans against a Category 5 storm . "I can save them millions, these things run in cycles," says President Obama .
 The feds are scrambling to get up the $61 million they stole from the feds . They were scrambling to find out how to pay back the stolen money .
 "If the truth dare be told, we were hoping to be gone before TSHTF but we forgot about God’s sense of humor," the author says .
 It turned out that He was getting even for 90 combined years of our giving him the Bird . "He's getting even," he said. "I'm getting even"
 He was a loving God these days and would give us just a little taste to get our attention . Nothing too dramatic, He was just trying to get us to get attention .
 All broadcast stations will follow activation procedures in the EAS Operating Handbook for a national level emergency . The EAS operating Handbook will be used to activate broadcast stations .
 The President of the United States or his representative will shortly deliver a message over the Emergency Alert System . The President will be delivering a message to the public .
 A local disaster was only a national emergency if you lived in New Orleans . New Orleans was a major city of New Orleans, but it was a national disaster in the state .
 Air France flight was just arriving at Kennedy Airport with several passengers with colds . Air France passengers were flying with a cold .
 The San Andreas let loose with The Big One just before the Chinese launched and the people aboard the Air France flight all had the avian flu . Air France passengers had the bird flu .
 US detonated 4 HEMP warheads over the US, wiping out electrical generation capabilities and making 90% of the vehicles in the United States inoperable . They also wiped out all of the electrical generation capability .
 Without electricity, the U.S. stock markets couldn’t open and the President responded in kind, wiping every major Chinese city off the face of the planet . The President wiped out all major Chinese cities without electricity .
 There weren't enough replacement transformers in the world to get the lights back on anytime soon . There weren’t enough replacements for transformers .
 USGS gives preliminary magnitude of quake on San Andreas, M w 8.2.2 . USGS had given preliminary magnitude to the quake on the San Andreas .
 We had to deal with the ground shaking every couple of hours plus radioactive fallout but didn’t know about the avian flu, yet, yet . ‘We had to . deal with ground shaking, radioactive fallout and radioactive fallout, yet. yet. We had . to deal
 We voted and Chris’s price of admission was changing the oil in the generator . Chris: "We voted. We voted."
 After we were able to come out of our overcrowded hole in the ground, Dick would see about getting the gas back on and repair any broken plumbing . Dick would be able to get back on the gas and fix the broken plumbing in the hole .
 They muffle the sound and don’t totally silence the rifle, making muffler a more correct name . The muffler is a better name than a muffler .
 It was becoming difficult to get upset about people dying, there had been so many since the turn of the century . It was 'difficult to get angry' at the number of people who have died in recent years, he said .
 The WTC was only a month’s worth of highway deaths compressed into a very short time . The WTC is only one of many highway deaths that occurred in the past month .
 Japan is sending relief workers and $220,600 worth of goods such as blankets and tents . Japan is experienced in dealing with quakes of its own . It is also sending aid to quake victims .
 Added to the $200,000 they pledged to the U.S. after Katrina, they should be close to broke . Added to their pledge to the United States, they are close to breaking .
 Al Qaeda has put job advertisements on the Internet asking for supporters to help put together its Web statements and video montages . The job advertisements are posted in Arabic media, a newspaper reported .
 London-based Asharq al-Awsat said al Qaeda had ""vacant positions"" for video production and editing statements, footage and international media coverage about militants .
 I’m sort of worried about that avian flu; regular flu shots won’t protect you against it . Regular flu shots will not protect you from it, says CNN.com's Tom Charity .
 Our house looked like someone had used it as the pins in a bowling alley, cracked in dozens of places, the patio cover down on the west end and most of the windows broken . Our house was cracked, cracked and most windows broken.
 "I looked in the sliding glass door to see what kind of shape the kitchen was in," says author . "It's a good thing to see how much of the kitchen is in the shape it's in"
 The false ceiling Sharon had put in had come down so I couldn’t tell much of what had been put in there .
 "The place stunk, like someone had left food on the stove and it had rotted," she said . "It was like someone left food there and it stunk," she added . "The smell of the place was like it was rotting," she later said .
 We didn't have to worry about gas because of the earthquake valve and since the generator had run, I knew we didn’t have electricity . The earthquake valve kept us out of gas and we had no electricity .
 Chris and Patti went to check on their home as did Dick, Dave and Lance . Dick and Dave also checked on their own home . Chris, Patti, Lance and Dick checked on the home .
 Maybe this was what the outskirts of Hiroshima look like after they dropped the atom bomb . Maybe this is what it looks like after the bomb .
 From what we could learn on the single radio frequency, the earthquake had extended from just north of San Bernardino all the way past Ft. Ft. Juanita, California . The earthquake was centered near San Bernardino .
 The same radio listed the cities that had been hit with nukes, 10 including Washington . Washington was hit by nukes .
 HEMP attack had shut down everything electrical . Then to make matters worse, the HEMP . attack had also shut down all electrical systems in the world .
 I didn't have a chain, but did have a towing strap and they could use that to move the downed light poles . I didn’t have a chains . They could use a tow strap to tow the downed poles .
 I gave Ron and Clarence the CD V-715 and told them once we got the street cleared, it might be a good idea if they checked on their homes . I gave them an idea to check on their own homes .
 They should, I suggested, travel together and maybe take along the boys to enhance their firepower . They should take along with the boys .
 My shed must have slid 5-6’ and it was off its slab, says author . Problem would require emptying the shed before several of us could push it back in place .
 We can use Coleman stoves, ice chests, guns and ammo and a lot of things . We can also use Coleman stovecases and ice chests to store food .
 Survivalists prefer to think of it in term of strategic reallocation . We survivalists prefer the term 'strategic reallocations'
 The California National Guard could have been in Palmdale much sooner than this . The California Guard was in place in the city of Palmdare, California, on Saturday .
 "They had those MOPP suits, the battledress over garments that had charcoal liners," she said . "They were those suits that had those battlesresses," she later said .
 I have to see if I could get my computer up and check the field manuals I had on CDROMs to what the criteria was for them entering an area with residual fallout . I have a lot of questions to ask about the criteria .
 When Ron and Clarence returned 3 hours later, it was a mixture of good and bad news . "Ron and Clarence" returned to find out what had happened . Clarence and Ron were in the middle of the ordeal .
 They also got propane and Coleman camp stoves, fuel, empty propane bottles and ice chests .
 They must have done this between Ron and Clarence’s homes because they also had tents . Clarence and Ron had tents between their homes .
 Ron had also cleaned out everything from our list from the Wal-Mart Pharmacy . Ron also had also cleared out everything he bought from the pharmacy .
 The bag of pills he had for Linda and him was larger than the bag she had for Sharon and me . Sharon and Linda were in the same bag as Linda and Sharon .
 They were gone about 2 hours and while they were gone, some of us set up tents . Some of the tents were set up while the men were gone .
 "We brought the folding tables up from the shelters and had everything out of the house by the time they were back," says family member .
 "I have my wheelchair all charged up and can sit up near the entrance in case anyone comes to the tract. I'm not afraid to sit in my wheelchair," she says . She says she has her wheelchair charged up, ready to use it if she needs it .
 "I didn’t see anything all night. Other than a couple of patrol cars on 47th Street East going somewhere in a hurry," says reporter .
 "Around 6am I woke Ron up and told him they’d better get on the road before the Guard showed up," he says . "I told him he’s better get up and get out of the car," he adds .
 He told me that they’d hit Pep Boys and a couple of other places that sold gas can plus the Lowe’s for generators . He said he’ll also go to Pep Boys, a couple other places where they can buy generators .
 After that, they’d get all of the propane they could and call it quits . They'd like to use propane to get their propane out of the tank .
 They hit both Lowe's and Home Depot, which was only about a block away from Lowe’s . They were only a block from Lowe's .
 They came back to drop off a truck and trailer load of generators and empty gas cans . They headed out for more. They headed for more .
 They came back an hour will more gas cans and headed out for propane . The couple went back to the store for gas cans, propane and gas .
 By noon they were back and we had everything we needed, except gasoline . "By noon they had everything from gasoline, except for gasoline," said police chief .
 A Hummer pulled up at the front of the tract and two guys got out, a Sergeant and a Lieutenant . The two men got out of the Hummer and were taken into custody .
 They ignored me and tried to get past, even though I had my Winchester in the scabbard of Salina . I had Berettas strapped on and a shotgun across my lap . I was sitting in the saddle with a shotgun and a Winchester in his pocket .
 "Nobody and I repeat, nobody, is taking any weapons from me. I’ve been a member for 41 years and nobody, I repeat ... is taking a weapon from me," he said .
 There is nothing illegal about a pump shotgun, single action revolvers or lever action rifles, says CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 I may have given up on Geraldo, but I don’t think much of the government of California . I don't think that much of California's government .
 Chris was standing there shaking his head; he’d never heard the 3 of us when we really got the routine going good . Chris was shaking his hands; he'd never heard him sing .
 "I put the safety on and laid the shotgun on my wheelchair, loosening the hammer thongs on my two revolvers," he says . "The safety on is the safety of the gun," he said .
 I reset my hat and turned to look them in the eye, hand poised over the crossdraw holster . I reset his hat and looked at them again: "I don't know what I'm going to do next."
 All they had to do was show me their IDs and ask me how many people were in the housing tract, I would have told them. All they needed to do is show their IDs, he said .
 The orders said Iraq, but George was a politician, and all politicians lie . George W. Bush was the president of the United States in 2003 . He has been in Iraq since 2003 .
 I knew how to take out one of those tanks too, Derek explained all of the weak spots to me. Derek explained how to do it, and I knew it too. I knew what to do, he said .
 From the front, they were impossible to hurt, but from the back they were particularly vulnerable . From the back, they would be particularly vulnerable if they were hurt, says CNN.com .
 It would be nice if they did, I could get a new house from the government and keep the insurance money . It would also be nice to get the government's insurance money, she says . She says she hopes the government will give her new house .
 We didn’t really need a thing, we’d already been out and about, but if they wanted to give us MREs, we could hang on to them until the next 6 disasters . We didn't really need anything, we'd already been . We could
 We'd had 3 all at once and if there were a 4th, we'd have 9 before it ended . We’d had 9 before the end of the season, says the author .
 The real reason I wrote fiction was because I hated soap operas and if I had to contend with them, I might just as well write my own . "I'm not afraid to write fiction. I'm scared to write a novel," she says .
 This was going to be the 3 amigos last campaign, we were getting too old for this stuff. But this was going for this year's election, and it was too late for the campaign .
 French are the furthest along on the vaccine for the H5N1 virus . I had read just before TSHTF that the French were the most likely to be working on a vaccine .
 The United States had ordered 2 million doses of the vaccine . They had a vaccine that worked most of the time and the U.S. had ordered more than a million doses .
 Clarence and I had both had the flu, so maybe our immune systems were up to snuff . Clarence and Clarence both had flu, but maybe their immune systems are up for snuff?
 We should probably just get some light, medium and heavy machine guns and some hand grenades . We should also get a lot of hand grenades and machine guns, too .
 "Once they realize we’ve looted their Logistic Base, they’re going to guard the place like Fort Knox. Once they realize . We’ll be guarding the place as Fort Knox," he says .
 The Ma Deuce is the heavy machinegun . The M240 is a medium machinegun and your friend and mine is the M240 . The Deuce, the Ma240, is a heavy machine gun .
 If we can find an Mk-19, so much the better, they have a range of over a mile . They have to be found to be able to reach a mile or reach a distance of more than one mile .
 A semi would have been nice, but none of the ones at the Depot would start . The Depot would have needed a semi to start, but no one would be able to .
 Everyone found something they wanted and I drove my new used Hummer home, all by myself . I drove it home with the help of the family .
 I had it fixed up with a M240 and enough ammo that I could repel at least one small MZB attack . I had enough ammo to repel one small attack .
 When we got home, we covered them up with tarps and parked them all on Moonraker Road and Moondance Drive .
 The exact coordinates of your house can be determined by looking up your address on MapBlast and going to the highest resolution . The exact address can be found using the mapBlast's highest resolution option .
 My house is at approximately 34.57132N by 118.04692W and we live in the shed in the backyard . We live in a shed in our backyard .
 We stored the MREs in the shelter for the next time, assuming we lived through this one . The shelter is full of food and water .
 "Every time they came, I hit them up for another 74 cases of MREs," he says . "I'm going to be very happy with the results," he adds .
 The Guardsmen were wearing facemasks so we concluded that the flu was spreading . The Guardsman were wearing those N-95 or N-100 facemasks .
 Chris had the entrance blocked with his pickup and trailer . They didn’t try to enter the housing tract and Chris blocked the entrance .
 Six weeks into the disaster, we hadn’t seen a single insurance adjuster . Our principal problem was it was starting to get cold and six weeks into it, it was getting cold .
 Finally KTPI came back on the air broadcasting local disaster information . Finally, the radio was able to return to the air .
 You were supposed to call them if you had a missing loved one or whatever . They were meant to be used to help people find missing loved ones .
 The only news from the eastside was that a person or persons unknown had looted Big 5, Wal-Mart and the Chevron station on Pearblossom Highway . The only other news was that an unknown person or person had looted the stores .
 The person or persons unknown had completely gutted both stores and emptied the propane tanks at the Chevron station . The gas station was emptied by the person or person unknown .
 You already know what we borrowed so you know it couldn’t have been us. 62 couldn't have been them. We borrowed so know it .
 We had knocked down a fence and put a propane tanker in a neighbor’s backyard, under some camo netting we’d borrowed from Big 5 . The propane tankers were put in the backyard of a neighbor in Big 5.
 "I wasn’t worried about Big Foot that had been 30 years before on the Westside," says author . "Big Foot" was found 30 years ago in the area .
 If there was such a thing, you could see it coming a mile away and get the 50 cal loaded . If there were such an issue, it would be impossible to see the bullet coming from a 50 cal .
 What you couldn’t see was what I figured would kill us, those little Chinese bugs, the H5N1 virus . What you can't see is what you couldn't see was the little Chinese bug .
 "We checked all of the houses and the only people left alive in the tract was our little group. We checked all the houses," she said . "We were the last people to survive," she added .
 The CNG secured itself at the Lancaster and Palmdale Sheriff’s Stations, and them were prevented from enforcing any laws because the Governor refused to issue them ammunition .
 "By this point, I was totally paranoid, but they gave me the shot in my arm, not my shoulder," he says . "They gave me a shot in the arm not the shoulder. By this time, I'm totally paranoid," he adds .
 We broke into the High Desert Animal Clinic and borrowed their AVID Reader . That night we broke into an animal clinic and borrowed a copy of the book .
 Early studies showed that the vaccine was only partially effect; it worked on about % of the people . Early studies show that vaccine only worked on only about half of people .
 If the world experienced a pandemic like all of those alarmists were projecting, that meant that most of the people would get sick and many would die . Many would die if they were to suffer from the disease, Dr. Aaron Miller says .
 Some countries stockpile flu vaccines but since this was a new vaccine, nobody had any . Nobody had any of the new flu vaccines .
 We weren’t soldiers, healthcare workers or the military; we were just ordinary citizens . We weren't soldiers or healthcare workers, but we were ordinary citizens. We are not military, we are ordinary citizens, they say . We are here to share our thoughts with CNN iReport
 There is a medical supply place on Date in Lancaster and maybe they have some . There is no medical supply store in Lancaster .
 "You shoot them twice in the chest and once between the eyes. My buddy always says you shoot them three times in a row," he says .
 What we really needed was the 3M 6291 PI 00 Mask with a lot of spare PI 00 filters . We really needed a mask with a few spare filters . The mask is a mask that can be fitted with a filter filter filter .
 We had enough of the cheap disposable masks to last the better part of a year . But we had enough to last for a year, we found out .
 Neither KTPI nor that station in Pasadena was talking about the avian virus, which was very odd .
 "They talked about the 10 cities that had been bombed or nuked or whatever. They talked about 10 cities ... they talked about ... nuke or whatever," he said .
 Experts say the H5N1 strain is mutating steadily and fear it will eventually acquire the changes it needs to easily infect and spread among humans . Experts say they fear the strain will acquire the necessary changes needed to infect humans .
 If it does, they say, it will sweep around the world in months, possibly killing millions . They say it could kill millions if it does .
 The World Health Organization has been tracking the virus, taking samples and sending them to labs to be tested for mutations . The virus has been tracked by the WHO since April .
 WHO officials say quick action will be needed if the virus does make the final jump to become a human infection . WHO says quick action is needed if it becomes an infection that could infect humans .
 Some experts say the virus could theoretically be contained if the first human victims of a new strain are quarantined, treated quickly with antiviral drugs, and others around them are vaccinated .
 Stocks of antiviral drugs, such as Gilead and Roche's Tamifiu, are limited . The companies do not have the capacity to make large quantities quickly quickly .
 Vaccines take months to formulate and manufacture, and they must match the flu strain fairly precisely to be of any use . Vaccines cannot be made ahead of an epidemic, so they can't be made in advance of an outbreak .
 I know we had to change our plans about Barstow, but we’re a little better prepared, he says . We're going to be better prepared than we were before, he adds . I know that we're not going to have to change plans, he said .
 The M-40 system has been a reliable, proven weapon in the Marine Corps inventory since the Vietnam War . Mounting state-of-the-art optics and a composite stock, the system is a reliable and reliable weapon . It has been in service to the Marines since Vietnam War
 The M-40 is currently produced by the Marine Corps' own Rifle Team Equipment Shop at Quantico . It is being further refined for the 21st century .
 Winchester model 70 floorplate and modified trigger guard . Winchester Winchester 70 . Winchester . model 70 . floorplate, modified trigger guards . Winchester model . 70 floor plate .
 It brought to mind the old saying; you should walk a mile in a man’s moccasins before you judge him . You should walk in a mile of moccins before judge him, he says .
 Geena Davis wasn’t President and it was really a shame, she was a good one. She was a very good woman. She wasn't President. It was a shame .
 It was a shame it was only a TV program, she even told the reporters to leave her kids alone . She even told them to leave them alone .
 If they took all of the money they’re spent on trying to defeat Arnold and gave it to the state, there wouldn’t be a budget crisis . The state is in a state of crisis .
 I wasn’t so sure I’m going to vote for him, until my daughter started supporting his detractors, she says . ‘I’ll vote for President Obama,’ she says. ‘’
 They didn't have the energy to defend the housing tract one more time, and you couldn't kill the avian flu bug with a rifle . You can't kill a bird flu bug using a rifle, the government says .
 The Smurfs' forest village is carpet-bombed by warplanes . Smurfette is killed, leaving Baby smurf wailing in distress . The story is set in Belgium and based in Belgium .
 The scene from a bizarre commercial featuring Belgium's lovable blue-skinned cartoon characters is so upsetting it can only be shown after 9m to avoid scaring children . The commercial can be shown only after a certain amount of time .
 "I wanted to hang up my guns and let Chris and the others guard the housing tract," says the mayor . "We're not going to be able to do this again," he says . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do," he adds .
 We all have a favorite; mine was my Winchester rifle because it didn’t care if my hands were numb . I was proud of my Winchester Winchester rifle . I used to shoot with my Winchester because it was a favorite .
 He’d always wanted to shoot someone with that magnum of his and wanted to know if I was volunteering, he said . He wanted to ask if he was volunteering. He'd always wanted .
 In a world gone mad, with the electricity out for the duration plus 6 months, we were in a tough spot . The electricity was out for six months plus six months, continuing small aftershocks and the occasional click on the CD V-715 .
 The driver bringing the ice from the Northeast would probably bring the avian flu along . The driver would probably also bring the bird flu along, the driver says .
 The delivery truck of propane meant I wouldn’t run out electricity any time soon and I could always share . The delivery of propan meant I would always share. The delivery was a good thing for me.
 "We were sort of like the Palestinians, trapped in a refugee camp with limited resources but armed to the teeth," she says . "I was sort of . like the . Palestinians," she said. "I'm not afraid to go to war."
 My Fellow Americans, In view of the disasters in our country, we’ve decided to bring our troops home. My fellow Americans, President Obama says .
 They have had the H5N1 vaccinations and will be able to help restore order . They have been given the vaccinations and are expected to return to normalcy .
 Your country will pursue a different course of action to end the War on Terror . Your country is at risk of losing the war on terror .
 "I urge all of you to cooperate with local authorities. Until that time, I urge all the . authorities," he said. "We will not be able to find out what happened."
 You can see them, but they don't give off a big enough return that you recognize them as aircraft . You can also see them in the sky, but not in the air .
 I sup72 pose you’re right, if he were going to use nukes against them, he’d have to use the B2s, he says . But he says, 'If he were to use it, he would have had to use them against them
 A flight of 4 B-2s out of Diego Garcia could pretty well wipe out Iran and Iraq . The U.S. has a history of bombing raids on Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan .
 The B61 has been deployed on a wide variety of tactical and strategic aircraft . It is deployed on numerous types of aircraft, including the B61 .
 Strategic versions have been carried on B-52, FB-111, B-1, and B-2 bombers . Strategic versions of the bomber have also been carried out .
 Tactical versions have been deployed on a variety of U.S. and NATO air force aircraft, including the F-100, F-104 and F-4 . The F-111 and Tornado versions have also been deployed in the United States .
 The U.S. Navy and Marines have used the B61-2/5S on A-4, A-6, and F/A-18 aircraft . The United States Navy and Marine Corps have used it on several aircraft .
 After the navy terminated the nuclear strike mission from U.S. aircraft carriers in the early 1990s, the bombs were retired and disassembled . The bombs were later disassembled and retired and dismantled .
 According to the Bush administration's recent Nuclear Posture Review, some future F-35 Joint Strike Fighters may be nuclear-capable . The Bush administration says some future Lockheed Martin F-45s could be nuclear capable .
 Peacekeeper intercontinental ballistic missile mission came to an end Sept. 30 . The Peacekeeper mission was part of a U.S. Air Force commitment to the Peacekeeper program .
 Peacekeeper’s role in nuclear deterrence . Ronald M Sega, undersecretary of the Air Force, were on hand to celebrate the Peacekeeper's role .
 Sega, guest speaker at the event, had words of thanks and appreciation for the people who made the Peacekeeper mission a success throughout its years . Sega: Peacekeeper will continue to be a Peacekeeper organization .
 Peacekeeper credited with helping to end Cold War . He also explained its development and journey to becoming an operational weapon system .
 The Peacekeeper was the nation’s most advanced strategic missile . It was so advanced that it was called the Missile Experimental, or MX, during President Jimmy Carter's administration . The Peacekeepers were launched in the 1970s .
 The Peacekeeper warheads will be installed on Minuteman III ICBMs . They will be part of the Safety Enhanced Re-entry Vehicle program . The program will allow the Air Force to upgrade its Minutseman fleet .
 It took a while to pull troops out of Iran, Iraq, South Korea, Germany and other places we had troops stationed, says President Obama . "It took a lot of time to pull the troops out," says Obama .
 For some reason, they had those airmen working overtime; trying to make sure all of the wing coatings were just perfect . Airmen were working overtime trying to get the wings coatings just perfect.
 George was missing a golden opportunity to get the Democrats in Congress really pissed off . If it wasn’t, George would have been able to get a lot of people mad at him .
 We should be worried about Cleveland Volcano, Mount Spurr and Tanaga Volcano . We had plenty of volcanoes of our own . We should worry about them instead of Cleveland Volcano .
 Corporal who brought MREs and 74 cases of water had the sniffles . Corporal brought the 74 cases with 74 cases had sniffles. Corporal also brought 74 cases and 74 water .
 I guess it didn't matter about the $2,000 shopping cards, our shopping cards didn’t have a limit and ammo was readily available . We were able to buy a gun and ammo in the '90s .
 I read the book as a serial in the Weekly Magazine that came with the Sunday paper, that and Jurassic Park . I read it as a . serial in . the Weekly . Magazine . That and Jurassic . Park .
 It was only later that I met the lady who claimed she called Michael Crichton, Mikey. It was later later that she claimed to have called him 'Mikey' She said she had a crush on the author .
 Entered Harvard Medical School, MD 1969; spent one year as a postdoctoral fellow at the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, California 19691970 .
 By February, the houses had completely collapsed and the garages were still standing . Nobody was willing to risk spending all night in their garages, but by February, they had collapsed .
 We’d been watching for the MZBs, but didn’t see any because we weren't sure what they looked like . We'd been trying to find out what they look like, but we didn't see any .
 'Probably the French, they opposed everything we did including manufacturing soap' 'They opposed everything from manufacturing soap. Probably the French,' he said .
 He’s been arrested over 70 times for protesting the U.S. government . Maybe he ought to move to Spain .
 We heard later that someone had nuked Iraq and Iran, probably the French, probably . The French were responsible .
 The United States ambassador to the UN wanted to censure the French for their unprovoked attack . The U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations wanted to the General Assembly censure France for their attack .
 John Bolton just about had me believing that the French did it. This guy, John Bolton, just about . I'm not sure what happened to the French, but I'm sure they did it .
 The French had 3 Triomphant class submarines all equipped with 16 M45 SLBMs . The French also had 3 submarines equipped with M45SLBMs. The French submarine was equipped with a total of 16 SLBMMs .
 The M45 differs from its predecessor by its increased range (6000 km vs.00 km), its increased accuracy and penetration capabilities and its new TN75 warheads . The new M45 has an increased range of about 6,000 km, and a new range of warheads .
 The French used the D5 missiles with the older lOOkT warheads, which were about the size of the 150KT warheads used by the French . They used the older warheads .
 Bolton insisted that all of the D5s had been upgraded to the W88, 450kT warheads . Bolton was insisting that all . of the . D5's had upgraded to . the . W88 warheads .
 Bolton claimed that the French refused to allow anyone to inspect their subs . Bolton said that proved that what he was saying was true . The French denied Bolton’s claim but refused to let anyone inspect their 3 subs .
 The French accelerated the construction of their 4th Triomphant class sub, Terrible, and launched it early . Meanwhile the French accelerated construction of the 4th sub, the French sub .
 The cold morning sky was clear as we took off from the Pyongyang airport in a dark green military helicopter bearing the distinct red-star emblem of the DPR .
 As the vintage 1960s chopper flew with surprising quiet over the rough mountain terrain, Dr. John Sutter was flying in the chopper .
 Li Sang Gun, director of the ""Radiochemistry Laboratory"" at Yongbyon, and I made an attempt at small talk . Li Sang . Gun, Director of the "Radiochemical Laboratory" at Yong byongbyon .
 Li was escorting the first official U.S. delegation ever to visit his country to the highly secret Yongbyon nuclear complex 75 miles to the northwest . Li is escorting a first official United States delegation ever .
 North Korea's first small nuclear reactor lay dormant, with some 48 tons of highly radioactive spent fuel stored in a pool of water . The reactor is believed to be the first of its kind in North Korea .
 The fuel contained enough plutonium for possibly five or six nuclear weapons . The fuel was used to fuel a nuclear reactor in a reactor that could be used to build a nuclear bomb .
 There isn’t much I can do about hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, volcanoes or tsunamis, but a nuclear war can be protected against. There isn't much to do about earthquakes or tornadoes or earthquakes .
 As long as your shelter isn’t in the crater, you have a chance to survive . You have to keep shelter in place to survive in a crater .
 People should have learned something from Three-Mile Island and Chernobyl, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Chernobyl was the site of a nuclear disaster in 1986 .
 There are something on the order of up to 20,000 nuclear weapons distributed in the arsenals of the various countries . If that weren’t enough, there are also around 20,500 nuclear weapons .
 You don't need food, water, shelter, medicine or anything if you're dead . You don’t need food or water, water or shelter if you’re dead .
 Even if your shelter is a makeshift thing in your basement, you need to survive the fallout before you worry about medicine . Even if you have a makeshift shelter, you should be prepared for the worst .
 Even though I take insulin, I could get by without for a few days, I’m a type II not a type I diabetic . Even though he takes insulin, he says he’s a Type II diabetic .
 Insulin keeps well and I’d guess that every insulin dependent person never gets below one or two bottles . Insulin is a good way to keep your insulin supply well .
 If you don't have the money for a CD V-715, buy a Kearny kit because they’re cheap . Buy Kearny kits because they're cheap .
 The U.S. has been hit by more than 1,000 missiles in the past year . It's not the first time the world has seen such a missile strike in the Middle East .
 If you live north of Minneapolis, the area is RED because they are east of all of the missile silos . The area is red because it is located east of the silos and is near the Pentagon .
 "I think about it every time I remember those B-47s sitting on the Edwards runway in 1962," says author . "It was a very special moment for me to remember," he says .
 We’re only 40 miles as the crow flies from where they parked those 12 B-47s carrying hydrogen bombs . We're not far from the site where they were parked the 12 .
 "We went to work like any other morning and then Kennedy made that address and scared most of us to death," says Kennedy . "Most of us were scared of death. Most of us didn't know what was going on that morning," she says .
 "We came home that night to find 12 B-47s, probably from March, sitting on the end of the runway loaded up and ready to go," pilot says .
 Someone must have removed 2 from each of the sixteen missiles so we only had 6 warheads per missile . The warheads were removed from each missile so there were only 6 warheads each missile .
 I had my wheelchair on the sidewalk these days and Chris had removed his pickup and trailer from in front of the entrance to Moon Shadows . Chris removed the trailer from outside of Moon Shadows entrance .
 "Quite honestly I was afraid of the dark and had been since about age 5. I asked him to sit and visit for a while," she said . "I was afraid to sit in the dark. I had been afraid of it since age 5."
 Missy sat with me on a leash and I knew that no one could sneak up on her . Usually Missy would sit with her on leash and she sat with a leash . She sat with her dog on the leash and was always safe .
 We had a Vfe gallon thermos of coffee and he had his packets of Sweet and Low .
 "I had Benadryl for when the coffee finally got to me and gave me hives," she says . "It was a great day for me, but I had to take it down."
 Even though it had only been a few months since the earthquake and attack and none of us had gotten the avian flu, things weren’t really good . Things weren't really good, even though it hadn't been as bad as it had been .
 The California Earthquake Insurance was a state program . Someone hadn’t done a very good job of estimating the losses that would come from the Big One .
 "They said they would pay our claims, eventually, but we were wondering if we could hold out that long" "We're wondering if they would be able to hold out"
 The CNG had forced its way into the tract, pulled the tarps off the Hummers and driven them off . The driver of the CNG was killed in the attack .
 Lance had foreseen the problem and brought tripods for the Ma Deuces from Barstow . Lance's team had to bring tripods to the scene in order to get the best shots .
 "They were pretty darned heavy and I couldn’t handle one had I wanted to," he says . "I couldn't handle one," he adds .
 He claimed he never laid hands on a M240, but he had it disassembled for cleaning in a minute . He claimed to have cleaned it up for cleaning .
 "For all he told me about what he did in ‘Nam, I had no idea what he was doing over there," he said . And for all of his stories, he said, "I'm not sure what I did."
 "Let the young guns have them, they’re strong and like stuff that fires a lot of shots," he says . "Let’s young kids have them," he adds . "They’ll be strong and fire lots of shots"
 I suppose if we could come up with some sort of scabbard for the back of this wheelchair, I could carry the MIA and the magazines in saddlebags or something . I suppose we could carry MIA and magazines in a saddlebag or something.
 Clarence and I discussed this and we’re going to wait for the insurance to settle. Clarence says he’s not sure how long it will be for him .
 If they had waited until they had fielded more of the DF-31 A, it could have been a different story . The U.S. military says it will be a long-term problem .
 Our interfering in Taiwan invasion forced them to launch way ahead of schedule . But I suppose our interfering in their Taiwan invasion made them launch .
 "Our problem is that no one is willing to accept the risks that go along with space flight," NASA says . "We need to be able to go to space. We need to get ready for the risks," NASA director says .
 If they hadn’t been in such a hurry, they could have built a real space shuttle that was carried atop of the rocket instead of being strapped onto the side of it .
 The F-1 engines each developed 1. million pounds of thrust . of they had used maybe 8 engines, they could have lifted the shuttle into orbit without much trouble . The F1 engines developed 1 million pounds per hour of thrust and could have used 8 engines .
 All of the stages were recoverable and if anything went wrong with the launch, the shuttle fired its engines and left the area almost instantly . The shuttle was able to launch almost instantly from the launch site .
 Diabetic Neuropathy is a small blood vessel disease that ends up killing of the nerves in your periphery . Diabetic neuropathy is small blood vessels disease that kills nerves in the periphery .
 Ron had prostate cancer and that changed him more than you can imagine, he says . Ron's cancer changed him even more deeply than you could imagine . Ron says he is proud of his family's resilience .
 They got their Hummers because there were belts in the machineguns mounted on the Hummers they already had . The belt belts were used to shoot machineguns . The belts were attached to the machine guns mounted on Hummers already .
 When the Earthquake Authority finally paid our claims, there was a lot to do. When the earthquake authority finally paid us, we had a lot of work to do .
 We extend the kitchen to the corner they left open in the original floor plan, increasing the size of the house . The kitchen was left in the corner of the kitchen left open .
 While the house was down, I had the shelter removed and placed in storage . The shelter was removed from the house and placed into storage .
 "We divided up the machineguns; none of the guys in the housing tract wanted anything to do with them" "The machineguns were divided up, and none of them wanted anything from them," says the author .
 There still wasn't any electricity and because AmeriGas had picked up their tank, I didn’t have a generator . "There still wasn”t any electricity," she says .
 I suppose I could have used bottles, but let the contractor provide his own electricity . I suppose it could have been a bottle of water .
 "You get a good framing crew and they can frame a house in a day or two," says the owner of the framing company . "They can frame houses in a couple of days," says owner .
 The room that I used as an office couldn’t legally be converted to a bedroom because it connected to the garage . The room was used as a bedroom but it couldn't be legally converted into a bedroom . It was used to be an office for the first time in a row
 We wired the place right this time, using 25 pairs for the phone and more electrical circuits . We used 25 pairs of electrical circuits to make the project .
 Kingman wasn’t really that far from Searchlight as the crow files, 53 miles away . Kingman is located in Searchlight .
 Given the choice of the boonies or a large city, I'd take the boony, he says . But given the choice, he’d take the city, he adds .
 When we got there, I looked, but couldn’t find the searchlight; maybe I missed something . Maybe I didn't find it, but I did find it. Maybe I missed it.
 Searchlight is a little cooler than Las Vegas because it's on a higher elevation . It still ranges in the nineties in the summer; cool enough to ride in the heat .
 Ron bought 5 acres and hired a lawyer to get it rezoned to R-1 . Ron bought a lawyer and hired him to get the land re-zoned . Ron says it's a done deal .
 The shelter had to be dynamited into place, the ground was a little on the hard side . The shelter was dynamited to place, and the ground is hard enough .
 Ron said we should get together and share a 10,000-gallon propane tank that was metered . Ron said he and Ron should share the tank . Ron: "Ron, Ron, Ron and Ron are very supportive of each other"
 I suggested that we each take one of the 1,700-gallon cisterns and think about putting in a new tank for the shelter . The shelter is in need of sheltering animals, but the shelter is full of volunteers .
 "We decided to leave it above ground because water couldn’t become radioactive. We decided to stay above ground as water couldn't become radioactive," she said .
 When the kids wanted to know where we were moving, we told them Las Vegas . "When the kids asked, 'Where are you going to be? Las Vegas. When we moved, we said Las Vegas."
 We only gave them the cell phone numbers; we didn’t want them to find us . "We just gave them cell numbers," she says . "They only gave us cell numbers. We didn't want them found us," she adds .
 Ron added a Kohler 30RES in case he lost his lights, but then they had more money to spend than we did . Ron added some Kohler lights to his car, but they were too expensive to buy .
 The residents of A Family Alone got a prefabricated barn after I told Ron about a story I written where the residents got a pre-built barn . They popped for a prefablericated farm after I . told Ron that I told him about the story . The residents got
 The place was perfect when we 83 were done; all we needed was the livestock . "The place was . done when we were done," she said .
 Ron bought a put in a Castlebrook Barns Raised Center Aisle 8 stall horse barn on a concrete slab from the company in Fontana . Ron bought the barn for $1.5 million .
 Sharon and Sharon got saddle horses, Sharon got her Arabian and I got a gaited mule that had flunked the test . They bought saddle horses and Sharon bought a mule for the test. Sharon got a saddle horse that she used to ride .
 Onan RSI 5000 or the Kohler RES30 put out a bit more than lOOamps so we’d always have full power . Kohler Res30 puts out about equal amount of power, both put out more than the Onan .
 Searchlight is located in a small Nevada town named Searchlight . The town didn't have a searchlight that I could find .
 It didn't really matter, we’d have carried anyway, but now we could carry a concealed weapon anywhere it was permitted . It didn’t really matter . We could carry concealed weapons anywhere it’s permitted .
 The H&K USP Tactical 45 is a 45-pound H&KR Tactical 45 . The dock is the first time the dock has been used in the USP 45 .
 The larger handguns are more difficult to silence, the bigger the bore the greater the noise . But when I checked I learned that the larger handguns were more . difficult to . silence .
 A Shooting Times Technical Editor rates the 9mm Luger and .357 Magnum as the most influential autoader and revolver cartridges of the century . He rates them as the best autoaders and revolver .
 The award for top pistol and revolver cartridge of the 20th century by any standard should really go to the .22 Long Rifle rimfire for both, he said .
 Given a choice between the .380 and the 9mm, 9mm won hands down, he said . The 9mm is the most versatile handgun .
 Charter Arms .44 Bulldog 87 went with #18, the Browning Hi-Power . Given such a limited choice, I went with .18, I chose #18 .
 AAC has made a number of improvements to the EVOLUTION-9 silencer . AAC has been working to satisfy the requirements of a major U.S. Military Anti-Terrorist unit .
 The Nielsen Device is now completely integrated within the 1.25 in diameter, aerospace quality aluminum body, yielding a sleek appearance .
 Improvements to the baffle stack and initial expansion chamber have further reduced first round pop and increased the overall level of sound reduction . Improvements also have improved the sound quality of the sound .
 EVOLUTION-9 delivers flawless semiautomatic operation with traditionally recalcitrant Browning inspired designs from Glock, Heckler & Koch, Sig Sauer, and Walther . The EVOLution-9 will be available in the U.S. and Europe .
 EVOLUTION-9 is delivered with a comprehensive operator’s manual, takedown tool, and one Nielsen Device piston assembly . The EVOLution-9 has a takedown tool and takedown tool .
 EVOLUTION-9 can be used on a variety of 9mm host firearms . Additional piston assemblies are available in 1/2-28, 1-2-32, and Ml3 x 1 LH threads .
 The EVOLUTION-9 is simply the world's most efficient, high performance, recoil assisted 9mm silencer . It is the world’s most efficient and high performance recoil assisted silencers .
 It was like having a long lost friend come home when I ended up with a Browning HiPower. It's like a long-lost friend come back to me .
 Mec-Gar made a flush-fitting 15-round magazine for the Browning Hi-Power for only $28.50 each . MGBRHP15B Blue is a flush fit for a standard 15 round magazine .
 By the time I bought the gun, I’d spent a bundle on a 9mm handgun . The barrel, the suppressor, the federal tax stamp, the magazines and the ammo, the ammo .
 After a major earthquake and 14 nukes had hit the US, reality shows fell into disfavor . Reality shows have been a hit in the U.S.
 They weren’t doing that well in the first place and after, the last thing anyone wanted was another dose of reality . The last thing they wanted was a reality check for the first time .
 The Running Man is based on Arnold Schwarzenegger’s movie, the Running Man . Arnold directed and starred in the film, which was based on one of his movies .
 Reality shows began to disappear after Survivor, Donald’s whatever you called it . Reality shows have also disappeared in the last few years .
 Adam-12 was used to train new police officers . It was used for training new officers in the UK .
 I tried that once or twice and got up to about $300 before the nag decided not to cooperate . I tried to get up to $300 in the past but it never worked .
 When he gets it to $20 I play blackjack until I’m down to $2 and start over again . When I get it to . $20 he plays until he’s down $2, then he starts over again.
 I was making minimum bets and every once a while would put down $25 or $50. I was putting down $50 or $100, but I was always putting down the minimum bets . I was betting $25 to $50 when I made the bet .
 In the end, one guy ends up with all of the chips and walks away with a bundle of cash .
 The odds seem to favor me ending up with a Royal Flush and getting shot like Arnold Rothstein . I'm not sure what the odds are going to be, but I'm sure it's a good idea .
 Several companies’ makes cans for bolt action .50 caliber guns and Surefire makes can for the M240 . Several companies also makes cans .
 A disaster is a natural or man-made event that negatively affects life, property, livelihood or industry . Disaster is often resulting in permanent changes to human societies, ecosystems and environment . A natural disaster is the result of a disaster that affects life and property .
 Disasters manifest as hazards exacerbating vulnerable conditions and exceeding individuals' and communities' means to survive and thrive, experts say . Disasters are a hazard that exacerbates vulnerable conditions, exacerbates vulnerability and exceeds individuals' means of survival and thrive .
 Most events are under the jurisdiction of the United States Federal Emergency Management Agency and Department of Homeland Security .
 The rule of threes is personal and it can include deaths in the family or of close friends and even people in the same community . The rule is personal .
 On the day the pandemic arrived in the country aboard an Air France flight diverted to Newark, the spread was contained . Attacked as it was on the day of the attack, the outbreak was contained in New Jersey .
 Hundreds, not thousands or hundreds of thousands, contracted the avian flu . Hundreds of thousands contracted the bird flu in the past year .
 About half of them died, but the vaccination of the military and healthcare workers prevented them from spreading the disease . The vaccination of military and health workers prevented the disease spread .
 Good news, but that meant we’d only experienced 2 disasters, not 3 . Very good news for the U.S. But that meant that we hadn’t experienced 3 disasters, instead .
 The 3 of us initially chalked it up to our receiving the special flu vaccine, but we had been right . The vaccine we received was the run of the mill flu vaccine .
 Newark is the armpit of the universe, I don’t know, never been there. Maybe Newark is Newark, maybe Newark is New Jersey .
 We distributed the MREs to everyone at Moon Shadows, only taking our share . Moon Shadows only took their share .
 In Lighthouse, we kept them in the shelter, but to tell the truth I couldn’t understand why I insisted on them, other than to get our fair share . I couldn't understand why, but I wanted to get their fair share, the author says .
 The shelter was designed for 6, not 37, and I’d never do 37 people again, says the shelter . "The shelter was built for 6. Not 37 people," she says. "I’m not going to do that again."
 I bought a replacement carbon filter for the LUWA system, once you used them you had to replace them . Once you used the filter, you have to replace the filter .
 Clarence and Shirley set a doublewide on the other side of Ron’s house . It looked like the boss and the hired help after Clarence set the doublewide . Shirley and Clarence set it up in the backyard .
 "We were getting a little grass now, thanks to the manure and Ron watering the field," he said . "We're getting a lot of grass now," he added .
 Someone from the water district came around and told Ron to stop watering the field because there was a water shortage, he says . Ron says he was told by the district that water was scarce .
 From that point on, he had water hauled from Lake Mojave for the field . The field was filled with water from the lake, which he used to use .
 Searchlight was very much like rural Palmdale desert . It was a little higher and a little cooler than the desert itself .
 Clarence persuaded Clarence persuaded me to get a saddle horse and use Jack to haul our gear . Jack was used to haul the gear for Clarence's team . Clarence persuaded him to get the saddle horse to haul his gear .
 3 old men in their mid ‘60s with one foot in the grave didn’t have the energy . Not that we were going anywhere, 3 old . men in mid '60s . with one . foot in grave didn't have energy, they said .
 It took all three of us to set up the Ma Deuce, and even with the suppressor, it was pretty noisy . It took three people to set it up .
 When the well was in he went to the Water District folks and told them he didn’t need their water . The well was already in place, but he says he doesn't need it now .
 I would have loved to hear that conversation; Ron could be nasty when he wants . Ron could have been nasty, he said, but he could still be nasty . I would like to hear the conversation.
 I'm sure he didn’t cut off his nose to spite his face; our well could always go dry . I’m sure he cut it off in spite of his face, but our well always goes dry, he says . He says he didn't cut off nose
 He emptied and flushed the lake water tank and hooked it up to the first water tank . He then hooked the first tank up with the second tank .
 "We were ready for the next disaster, with water, fuel, shelter, machineguns and MREs," she says . "We're ready for our next disaster. We were ready to survive," she adds .
 "I had one heck of a pile of little packets of toilet paper. They ranged from good to bad, but I had a lot of them," she says .
 You can never have too many of some things and toilet paper is at the top of my list . Toilet paper is one of the most important things I've ever had .
 After we moved to grandpa’s farm in ’48, I thought the outhouse was a thing of the past,’48 . ‘The outhouse is the past. I thought it was the past . After moving to a farm in '48, it
 They didn’t have indoor plumbing until they moved to town in the mid ‘50s . The family moved to the city in the '50s and '60s, but they didn't have indoor water until the '80s .
 "I didn’t want them to get old and either go boom or not work when we were attacked by the MZBs. We had a few and I didn't want them old," he said. "We had a couple of MZBs. We didn't
 I want to thank my 7-9 loyal readers; you read and comment and I’ll keep writing . I also thank my loyal readers .
 Some large areas of land may be best used for livestock farming; and, • has a lot of land covered with grass and shrubs . It may be that some large areas are best used to livestock farming . Some of the land is covered in grass, shrubs and grasses .
 "If we get more livestock, we’ll have more manure and can grow more grass," says farmer . "We’ve got more livestock. We’re growing grass. If we get livestock. It’s more manure. We can grow grass. We
 We could have 5 acres of alfalfa planted and get someone to bale it in the small bales to feed the animals during the winter . It could be used to feed animals in the winter.
 My father had a piece of land he had on the other side of the railroad tracks . That’s what my father did with the small piece of . land . That's what he did .
 A cow eats about Vz a bale of hay a day, less if they’re munching grass . A cow can eat about VZ a hay bale a day .
 Canta y no llores . Porque cantando se alegran Cieltio Undo los corazones . Canta and you do not cry. Canta .
 He was on the set to show the actor how to be a sergeant but did such a better job that they hired him to play the part . He did so well he was hired to play a sergeant .
 Ermey was awarded the honorary rank of Gunnery Sergeant, thus his nickname, The Gunny . Although he retired from the U.S. Marine Corps in 1971, he was awarded an honorary rank .
 Glock was 6th and the Springfield Armory MIA didn't even make the list . Glock is 6th on the list of firearms, Glock was sixth .
 This post-Civil War slogan would have been music to Sam Colt's ears had he lived long enough to hear it . Colt died in 18th Civil War, but his life was short enough for him .
 You know you’re old when you say; Nothing ever is as good as the memory . You know that when you're old, you're not old, when you think about memories .
 Survivalist Fiction requires action and a disaster to qualify for survivalist fiction . In order for a story to qualify as Survivalist fiction, you need action and disaster .
 "They got the lights on sooner than planned, about the time we moved to Searchlight. Oh, yeah, they got to . The lights on earlier than planned."
 The city was flooded with water, but it was able to pump it back into the water . The city had to pump the water back up and pump it in order to survive .
 I bought the horse to replace Jack, solely on the strength of the recommendation of my Ferrier friend . The horse is the first horse to be replaced by a new jockey since Jack .
 Tennessee Walking Horse did that funny gait when prompted . It was the first horse to do that when asked to do it .
 I think that Jack was jealous because Sam, my horse, did it better than he did. I think he was jealous . Sam, his horse, was jealous that he did it more than Sam did. Sam's horse was jealous of his horse's success .
 I named the horse after Sam Colt because the Beretta Stampedes were about as close as I’d ever get to owning Colt revolvers . I named him Sam Colt . The horse was named after Beretta because of Sam Colt's gun ownership .
 For the price of one of those, I had 2 Berettas and some of the . price of the Laredoan Crossdraw . For the same price, you can buy a Beretta and a Crossdraw for the same .
 I’d already nuked Lost Wages in some of my stories and China had hit us with a few of them, so I didn’t plan on a nuclear disaster . ‘I’ll already nuke lost Wages and China has hit us a few
 In some stories, I’d written that the terrorists had nuked us before the Chinese nuked them. In some cases, I'd written that . In some of these stories, the terrorists were nuked by the Chinese before the . Chinese nuke us, he said .
 Not a whole lot happened as we sat there in Searchlight waiting for the end of the world . Not a lot happened .
 Or maybe it was the other guys who bailed me, we may never know for sure . We may never have known if it was true, but it's a good thing .
 A dirty bomb combines a conventional explosive, such as dynamite, with radioactive material . The principal type of dirty bomb is a Radiological Dispersal Device .
 In most instances, the conventional explosive itself would have more immediate lethality than the radioactive material . The radioactive material would be more likely to be used in a conventional bomb than a radioactive device .
 At the levels created by most probable sources, not enough radiation would be present in a dirty bomb to kill people or cause severe illness . At most likely sources, radiation would not be enough radiation to kill or harm people .
 About 100,000 patients a day are released with radioactive material in their bodies . Most radioactive material employed in hospitals for diagnosis or treatment of cancer is sufficiently benign to be released daily .
 Certain radioactive materials, dispersed in the air, could contaminate up to several city blocks, creating fear and panic . However, certain other radioactive materials could also contaminate . This could require potentially costly cleanup .
 Public information might prevent panic sought by terrorists . Prompt, accurate, non-emotional public information might help prevent panic .
 The presumed purpose of its use would be therefore not as a Weapon of Mass Destruction but rather as a weapon of Mass Disruption . The presumed use of the weapon would be used to disrupt mass disruption .
 The dirty bomb going off in Lost Wages wasn't our 3rd disaster because we weren’t there. The dirty bombs going off was a disaster because of the fact that we weren't there.
 The bird flu virus that infected a Vietnamese girl was resistant to the main drug stockpiled in case of a pandemic . It's a sign that it's important to keep a second drug on hand as well, a researcher says .
 The drug, produced by Roche Holding AG, is in short supply as nations around the world try to stock up 99 on it in case of a global flu pandemic .
 In lab tests, girl's Tamiflu-resistant virus was susceptible to another drug, Relenza . Relenza is made by GlaxoSmithKline, which makes the drug .
 Power and water began returning to parts of Baghdad early Saturday morning hours after an election-eve insurgent attack . 70 percent of the city was plunged into darkness after an insurgent attack plunged 70 percent into darkness .
 In addition to the two cities, Beiji also was affected, Muhsin Shalesh said . Beiji was also affected .
 Turkish medical staff tested nine people for possible bird flu a day after European health officials confirmed what many had long feared was the arrival of the deadly H5N1 strain on Europe's doorstep . Turkish medical officials test nine people on Friday .
 European Union experts held crisis talks on the spread of the bird flu to examine the risk that migratory birds might pose for the 25-nation bloc . EU experts are examining the risk migratory bird flu might pose .
 EU member states to reduce contact between poultry and wild birds in high risk areas . The meeting is expected to approve measures to combat the spread of the disease . The EU Commission said it would require poultry to reduce poultry contact with wild birds .
 The spread of the disease from Asia was a “troubling sign”, U.S. Health Secretary Mike Leavitt said . The world must work harder to prepare for a potential flu pandemic among humans, he said .
 European Commission says bird flu outbreak in Turkey was indeed H5N1 . European Commission has advised Europe to prepare for a pandemic . Europe has been hit by a bird flu epidemic in Turkey .
 Turkish health officials kept nine people from western town of Turgutlu under observation . They carried out tests after the death of 40 of their pigeons, state-run Anatolian news agency said .
 There's a 1 in 3 chance of a major quake as high as magnitude 8 on the San Andreas and San Jacinto along either of the two faults in the next 30 years . A professor at Cal State San Bernardino specializes in the region's seismic geology .
 Lucy Jones, scientist in charge of Southern California for the U.S. Geological Survey, is blunt about the area's prospects during a huge quake on one of those two faults . She says the area is at risk of being hit by a huge earthquake .
 The Faults are the San Andreas Fault, the San Jacinto Fault and the Elsinore Fault . The fault lines are located in San Andreas, San Jacinta and Elsinores .
 Kleenex could be used as a substitute for toilet paper in a pinch . Ammo wasn't the second thing on my list of things you should never run out of .
 Ammo was third on the list with included cigarettes, coffee, rice, beans and macaroni in that order . The list also included onions, diced tomatoes and chili powder .
 The only meat item on my list was water packed tuna and the only dairy product was Velveeta . The only dairy item on the list was Vineeta .
 Toilet paper, Kleenex, ammo, cigarettes, coffee, rice, beans macaroni, onions, diced tomatoes and chili powder . 10 of the 11 items could be bought at any grocery store .
 Since toilet paper and Kleenex were redundant, I didn't worry if I got low on toilet paper . I didn’t worry about toilet paper, I used to use toilet paper for toiletries .
 The original engine had 60 horsepower but I managed to fit in a 4JB1 with a minimum of 61 hp . The original . engine had . 60 horsepower . The . original engine was 60 horsepower.
 "We should get a horse trailer and a motorcycle trailer that we can pull with the Hummers. What we should do is get a . Horse trailer and motorcycle trailer, we should be able to pull with Hummers."
 I think we should attend the Citizen’s Police Academy and then set up a Neighborhood Watch Program, unless you have a better idea . I did some snooping and I think it should be set up .
 We could install police scanners in our vehicles to keep in touch with business radios . Police scanners could be installed in our cars . We could use police scanners to communicate with businesses .
 "It couldn’t be simple like we’d drive around in our vehicles looking for trouble," he says . "It’s not simple," he adds . "We’re driving around looking for problems. We’ve got to look for trouble.
 In order to be reserve deputies we needed to shave 30 years and attend some school to be peace officers . We are reserve deputies in the state of Washington state .
 I seemed to remember killing off a politically correct peace officer in my story involving Jenna up near Reno, Nevada . The officer was killed in the shooting . Jenna was killed by a police officer in Reno .
 Even the Beretta 92FS rated higher than my Browning Hi-Power, go figure . Even the gun's rating was higher than that of a Beretta .
 A pair of Colt knockoffs and a Winchester, a horse named Sam, a mule named Jack and a wheelchair named Salina . Didn’t matter because I had a pair of . Colt knockoff knockoffs, a Winchester and a . horse . Sam, Sam, Jack
 Still working on a name for the trike and I was thinking of naming it Blue in honor of Robert Blake . Still working out a name .
 If you kill someone and get acquitted, the family sues for wrongful death and they get a second chance with a lesser burden of proof . If you get acquitted of killing someone, you can sue for wrongful wrongful death . You can get a better outcome if you're acquitted of murder,
 You might be innocent, but you still working 3 jobs and eating bologna, like Jerry Reed . Jerry Reed. You might work 3 jobs, but still working like Jerry . Reed .
 OJ made a public appearance the other day and 12 people lined up for autographs, eleven more than expected . 12 people were expected to line up for OJ's autographs . OJ has a history of autograph signings .
 If the government had been in charge, they’d still be waiting for the MREs and ice . The government had to be in charge of the government .
 She figures it will cost $11,000 per family to provide temporary assistance for 6 months.,000 families . She says it would cost $462 million to provide assistance .
 Even if they spin off FEMA from DFIS, the mindset has already been established . FEMA is already in place of DFIS . The mindset is already established .
 Once you tap the bottle, the clock starts ticking and you have to use the bottle up in 28 days . The bottle is refrigerated or not, refrigerated .
 In the refrigerator, I think my Humalin would last up to the expiration date on the bottle . In the fridge, Humalin could last up until the expiration dates on the bottles .
 You need electricity to preserve meat and refrigerated foods . Electricity is needed to preserve refrigerated food and meat .
 Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa's dream of building a subway to the ocean won't begin with digging . Mayor's dream is to build a subway line that would connect the ocean to the city's ocean .
 The Fairfax District home to the bubbling La Brea tar pits poses a particularly vexing problem for diggers . The area is home to bubbling tar pits that have been bubbling for decades .
 The luncheon meat might be the subject of satire back home in the US, but in South Korea, it is positively classy .
 South Korea is the largest market in the world for SPAM outside the United States . With $136 million in sales, the country is the biggest market for the material outside the U.S.
 40% of SPAM is purchased as gifts . Some consider the pink luncheon meat with its gelatinous shell too nice .
 Harriet Myers doesn’t seem to stand a snowball’s chance in hell . Whoever suggested that Harriet Myers was fodder for Congress was probably right .
 George will nominate another conservative Republican female judge and the Senate will have to approve her to avoid being accused of sexual bias . Then George will come long and nominate another .
 Harriet will go back to be his private counsel, probably with a raise . Harriet will return to be Harriet's private counsel .
 Once Bush gets his appointee, Republicans will have selected 7 of the 9 judges with only Ruth Bader Ginsberg and Stephen Beyer having been selected by a Democrat, Willy. Beyer .
 I haven’t had any faith in the U.S. Supreme Court since M'//er307US174.174. M' //er307U.C.174: "I’ve had no faith" in the United States Supreme Court .
 This is the only Supreme Court case where the court examined whether the 2nd amendment inhibits the feds from regulating guns, in this case the NFA regulation . The case was the only case examined the limits of the federal government .
 The lower court decided the law violated the 2nd amendment, and let the guys out . The men were released from jail .
 The government pursued an appeal, with no representation for Miller and his buddy . They promptly fled, or died, take your pick, and the government pursued the appeal . Miller and a buddy died, or fled, in the wake of his death .
 The court decides the law does not on its face violate the second amendment, at least as applied to a sawed off shotgun . The court decided the law doesn't violate the Second Amendment .
 The court does seem to hold the door open that if it is shown a gun is a “militia weapon” then the 2nd amendment forbids the feds from regulating that weapon . The court seems to open the possibility of a gun being a ‘militian weapon
 Assault Weapon is whatever they use to Assault you, maybe it’s a bow and arrows . An assault weapon is a weapon used to assault you . An Assault Weapon can be a weapon of choice .
 Police shot and wounded a man who allegedly took over a freight train with a bow and arrow . The incident was reminiscent of the Wild West, police say .
 Juventino Vallejo-Camerena boarded the train Sunday night as it was stopped for a signal . He threatened the engineer and conductor, the only people on board, police say .
 The crew members escaped and disabled the train by turning off fuel switches . They then used a cell phone to call police, Union Pacific spokesman says . Union Pacific says the crew members called police after escaping .
 Vallejo-Camerena was aboard the train in western San Bernardino County when officers arrived . Police say she was on the train at the time of the incident .
 The man cocked the bow and pointed an arrow at officers, who opened fire, Jones said . The man pointed the arrow at police, who then opened fire .
 Searchlight Airport is 1L3, elevation 3,410’, the runway is 5040x70 ft., asphalt in good condition . Airport is located in Searchlight, Arkansas, and is located near the town center .
 Runway 16/34 thresholds are marked with 6 green reflectors no lights . Single engine aircraft are based at the airport and they average 25 operations a month .
 Searchlight Airport is located approximately 70 miles southwest of Las Vegas . Searchlight airport is located about 70 miles from Las Vegas, Nevada .
 The Army Air Corps originally built the airstrip in the early 1950's, as an emergency alternate paved airstrip for Nellis Air Force Base . The airstrip was built in the 1950's as a temporary emergency airstrip .
 The hard-surface runway is located one mile south of Searchlight, Nevada on Highway 95 . It is just minutes away from Lake Mohave, a recreational area located on the Colorado River .
 Searchlight Airport offers no services and is uncontrolled, unmanned, and unlighted . The airport is located in Searchlight County, Georgia . It is uncontrolled and uncontrolled .
 The name ""SPAM"" was chosen in the 1930s when the product, which’s original name ""Hormel Spiced Ham"" was far less memorable, began to lose market share . The name "SPAM" was chosen by Hormel in 1930s .
 The current official explanation is the SP and AM were taken from “SPiced hAM” to win a $100 prize . The official explanation for the incident is that it was taken from the name "SPiced HAM"
 I always wrote in my stories that the place to be if it blew was in Reno, Nevada . Reno is a great place to go if it blows, but Reno is where it blows .
 That’s way outside of the range of pyroclastic flows and the heavy ash falls, says CNN.com . That's how far away from pyrocesses and ash falls . CNN's John Sutter says it's not unusual to see ash fall or pyro
 Only California is notified until it gets to Orange, only California, is notified .
 "We ask very politely for them to wave the limits due to the pending disaster," says CNN.com.com . We ask for the limits to be waved .
 We have to be discreet; I don’t think we’re allowed to wear the guns into the store, she says . "We have to wear them in the store," she says of the store .
 Everyone buy one double pack of the Kirkland maximum strength Allergy Sinus non-aspirin medicine . Kirkland is a manufacturer of Allergy and Sinus medicine .
 "When eatin' my cookin’ got the better of me. Well, I guess it was back in '63," he says . "I guess it's back in 1963," he adds .
 She said she would, so I said ""I do"" But I'd have said, ""I wouldn't"", if I'd just knew How Say in' ""I Do"" was gonna screw up all of my life . She said, "So I said she said, so
 "I wasn't too surprised, When I come home and found my suitcase sittin' out on the porch. Well, it wasn't 'too long 'til the lust all died," he said .
 "Goodbye, Turkey. Ill then, I found a note taped on the mailbox that said, ""Goodbye Turkey. Then, I find a note . It said, "Goodby, Turkey." Then, a note was taped to the mailbox, saying, "goodbye,
 "They split it right down the middle, and they give her the better half," she says . The couple split up the half of their daughter's life .
 "They give her the house, the kids, and both of the cars," she says . "They gave her the color television set, then they give her a house and the kids," she adds .
 Then they started talkin' about child support, alimony, and the cost of the court . "They started talkingin' on child support and alimony," she says .
 I'm tel I in' ya, they have made a mistake, 'Cause it adds up to more than this cowboy makes,' he says .
 They said they's splittin' it all down the middle, and she got the better half . She got the best half of her husband .
 She got the gold mine. Well, it all sounds mighty funny, but it hurts too much to laugh, she said . She got a gold mine, she says .
 In 1967, he notched his first chart hit with Guitar Man, which Elvis Presley soon covered . The singer's first hit was "Guitar Man"
 Reed recorded Tupelo Mississippi Flash, which proved to be his first Top 20 hit . After Presley recorded another of Reed's songs, United States Male, the songwriter recorded an Elvis tribute . The song was Reed's first hit .
 Reed teamed with Atkins for the duet LP Me and Jerry . Reed released Amos Moses, a hybrid of rock, country and Cajun styles in 1970 .
 In 1971 he issued his biggest hit, the chart-topper When You're Hot, You're hot, which was also the title track of his first solo album . During the 1970 television season he was a regular on the Glen Campbell Goodtime Hour .
 His greatest visibility was as a motion picture star, almost always in tandem with headliner Reynolds .
 After 1976's Gator, Reed appeared in 1978's High Ballinin' and 1979's Hot Stuff . Reed also appeared in 1979's "Hot Stuff" and "High Ballin"
 In 1979, he released a record comprised of both vocal and instrumental selections, Half & Half . He released the record in 1979, "Half & Half"
 I like Winchester lever action rifles, SAA revolvers and Country Western music . I like country Western music and Winchester . I also like Winchester .
 I’d drive to Texas for a semi load of beer, as long as it was Coors and I wasn’t dodging ash from the Long Valley Caldera . And yes, I'd travel to Texas to get Coors beer .
 Mono-Inyo Craters volcanic chain for the past 5,000 years . Let’s talk about the eruptive history for the Mono-inyo Crater .
 Eruption volumes have all been relatively small (generally less than 0.25 km 3 for the magmatic component of the May 1980 Mount St. St. Mary's eruption . Eruption volume has been relatively smaller than the eruption of May 1980 .
 Several of the explosive eruptions, however, have produced pyroclastic flows extending as far as 8 km from the vent . Several of these eruptions have been seen in the past .
 It was never a question of whether the caldera would erupt again, but rather it was a matter of when . The volcano was never expected to erupt again; it was always a question .
 Right now was when it let loose; bigger than the last time 760,000 years ago . The last time was when the first time it happened was 760,00 years ago. Right now is when it was bigger than that .
 This time it approached the eruption of Yellowstone 640,000 years ago, yielding ~240mi 3 /1,000km 3 of lava and ash in an explosive rhyolitic eruption . This time the eruption was similar to that of Yellowstone's 640,500 years ago .
 Experts say rhyolitic lava eruptions could range in volume from small to much larger volumes like those that formed Mammoth Mountain and Mammoth Knolls north of Mammoth Lakes .
 During their initial explosive phases, the more energetic of these eruptions typically produced large volumes of coarse pumice deposited as a thick blanket of tephra over a wide region, as well as destructive pyroclastic flows and surges capable of causing severe damage .
 Later phases of such eruptions produced steep-sided lava flows and domes . The later phases of these eruptions also produced slopes of lava flows .
 Katrina in 2005, which, in light of recent misadventures, wouldn’t happen anytime soon . Katrina was Katrina, Katrina Katrina, the nation’s first major disaster .
 The planet earth had experienced earthquakes, tsunamis, hurricanes and typhoons at an increasing rate . It had also experienced a number of earthquakes and tsunamics .
 The USGS figured Alaska would be next to go; man did they get a surprise . Alaska was the last state to be hit by the volcano . Alaska is the first state to have been hit by a volcano .
 A few months earlier, they had gone to high green level and a couple of weeks before, yellow . But a few months later, they were back in high green levels .
 California started to move people but Nevada didn’t seem too concerned . Nevada didn't seem too worried . California started moving people but didn't move people .
 The Orange alert changed that and areas included in the area of the Bishop Tuff, especially the heavily populated areas, began gearing up to evacuate . The heavily populated area was preparing for evacuation .
 There was no evacuating the M w 8.8. quake in California until after the fact . There were no evacuations in California after the quake .
 The 3 of us stayed around, guarded the ruins and got out of town as soon as we could . The 3 members of the crew were able to get out of the town .
 We could see the cloud of ash when it got really high using binoculars . The ash cloud could be seen in the distance of a mile or more .
 We could see it spreading out and headed generally in our direction, to the east . We could also see it moving generally in the direction of our east .
 The only problem I see is that stuff almost turns to concrete when it gets wet and dries . The only other problem is that it turns concrete into concrete when wet .
 I didn't bother with the chemical filter for the LUWA system, figuring the HEPA filters would be enough . I didn’t bother with a chemical filter .
 According to map of Bishop Tuff, San Diego would only get a light dusting unless the wind changed . San Diego could get a dusting if wind changes .
 Amy called on Sharon’s cell phone to go south and not come here, she’d be driving right into the ash fall . When Amy called, Amy called Sharon, Sharon said, “I told her to go down, not south,’t come here
 $500 would buy them enough gas to get to San Diego . David and Lorrie had all of my camping equipment . I figured $500 was enough gas .
 After supper, I fired up the radio shack to listen to the chat on the ham bands . The chat was on the radio at the end of the meal .
 "I was listening to a ham in Reno and they were getting ash this time around," says Rick Steves . Steves says the ham was getting ash in Reno, Nevada .
 The direction may have explained why the area was spared the previous time . The direction of the area may have helped explain why it was spared .
 Air around the center of a high-pressure system in the northern hemisphere flows clockwise and counter-clockwise . Air around center of low-pressure systems in the north hemisphere flows counter clockwise .
 The two collide over eastern Nevada and western Utah just as the LVC blows its lid . When the two collide, you have a real mess and ash goes every which way .
 The ash that gets high makes it to the jet stream and they don’t call it jet stream because it moves slowly . The ash is high enough to make it into the jet streams .
 A jet stream is a relatively narrow river of very strong horizontal winds embedded in the planetary winds aloft . The American Meteorological Society's Glossary of Weather and Climate defines a jet stream as a narrow river .
 Air rises in a high-pressure area and falls in a low-pressure region . The ash column was pushing 30km. Air is only a shade over 6km .
 CTAF isn't really a radio service at an airport it's more of a designated frequency to use for airplanes to announce to each other what they're doing . It's a designated radio service for airplanes .
 The plane is under control at the time of the crash, but it's fine if you know how to fly and the plane is in control .
 I’ve never been on a plane that crashed, but there’s that law they call the law of averages . I'll admit, he’ll admit, I've never been in a plane crash .
 For 4way switch wiring, you will need two 3-way switches and then as many 4-way switch switches as you want in between . You will need as many as three or more switches in between in order to get the best wiring . The wiring instructions are below .
 Two-wire cable runs from the light to the first switch, and then 3-wire is run between all the switches . Three-wire cables are used to connect lights to switches .
 Clarence and Clarence and I had the end switches and the shelter, the shelter and the light pole had the 4-way switches . Clarence and Ron had end switches . Ron and Clarence had the light poles and end switches for the shelter . Ron had the lights on the shelter. Clarence and
 Electrical fault is an unintended open or ground fault . A correct term because an electrical fault is a fault that is unintended open, ground or ground .
 Clarence or I had left a switch in a halfway position. However, it was more probable that Clarence or me had left it in a half-way position .
 Before I’d heard of George Santayana, I was a very poor student of history . Before I'd heard of his work, I'd been very poor students .
 The ultimate measure of a man is not where he stands in moments of comfort, says Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Morgan . Morgan: "Where he stands at times of challenge and controversy"
 Gary's career began with the state of Iowa's Department of Revenue and Finance in 1973 . Gary's first job was with Iowa's Revenue Department and Finance . Gary has been with the department since 1973 .
 He also served as a Field Supervisor, and later as a senior member of Iowa's Out-of-State Audit Team . He was also a field supervisor, Field Supervisor and member of the Iowa Audit Team.
 He was selected to implement usage of the program on a nationwide basis by the Out-of-State Audit Unit . He was subsequently selected to use the program nationwide .
 Gary's audit experience led him to leave the Department of Revenue and Finance to expand his career to include Individual Income Tax Return Preparation and Excise Tax Return Prepation . Gary says he is proud of his work as a tax preparer .
 His new career as an Excise Tax Consultant included such exercises as preparation of Business Plans and analysis of field audit techniques applicable to each of the 40+ states imposing a tax .
 Gary utilized his Excise Tax expertise to help clients resolve registration and filing issues with the various states . Starting with a small customer base in the San Francisco area, Gary had a small client base in California .
 A multi-state Excise Tax audit program is based on The Iowa Auditor computer program and utilizing Vertex Sales/Use tax rate database . That effort culminated with the development of a multi-State Excise tax audit program .
 The complexities of importing necessary invoice data into the program's databases led to the cancellation of the software development project during 1996 . The program was cancelled due to the difficulties of importing invoice data .
 Gary's latest challenge is programming web sites, specifically, this web site . Gary's new challenge involves programming web web sites .
 Every time he sees another new or neat feature, he has to reprogrammed this web site . He has been reprogramming this site for years .
 He received his MBA degree from the Drake Graduate School of Business in 1972 . He is the author of a new book, "Business Insider"
 I was given a whirlwind course on sales/use tax auditing . In order to become capable of making the tax audits, I had to go through a whirlwind of course .
 The state of Iowa only used 4 methods to perform audits, the detailed audit and 3 types of projections . The state only used four methods to audit the state .
 "I laid it out on paper and wrote a computer program in the dBase III language to do it for me," he says .
 What I should have done was made the local tax computation a separate module that only computed the local option taxes when the program compiled the liability . I should've done a different module that computed the tax calculations .
 Local leaders are taking steps "so this doesn't turn into some kind of race war,"" she said . Local leaders were taking steps to ensure the situation doesn't become a race war .
 I hate to rain on his parade, but they call it the 1st Amendment and the ACLU will defend the right of Nazi’s to march, Ed must have forgotten. The ACLU is defending the right to march .
 Andrew Sheppard said it best in the first part of his speech, right before he stomped on the 2nd Amendment . Sheppard: "The Second Amendment is a right to freedom of speech"
 If someone wants to burn the flag, that’s their right, it's also my right to conduct target practice anywhere I choose, he says . "I’m going to burn it, but I’ve got my own right to do it,” he
 "My defense will be that I went temporarily insane and did it on the spur of the moment during heightened passion in response to an uncontrollable urge," he said .
 "You better flip-flop back here and gimme' a hand, son, or we gonna be in a heap of trouble," he says . "I'm gonna get in trouble, son," he adds .
 The winner always says it’s a proper election and the loser usually complains of fraud . The loser always complains of voter fraud . But the winner says it's a legitimate election .
 We have had our 3 disasters and the story would be complete except for the fact that we hadn’t survived this disaster, yet, yet . The story would have been complete if the story had been complete, except for this disaster .
 We weren’t short on supplies and when the lights went out, again, we’d never even noticed the generators kicking in . The generators kicked in, even though we were short of supplies . We’ve never noticed the generator kicking in, but we were never
 "I had Ron shut down everything except the radios because they were my only set and the shelter already diverted enough power," she says . "Ron shut down all but the radios," she said .
 There was the refrigerator, freezer and freezer and the motor on the LUWA filter still running along with the radios . There was also the refrigerator and freezer still running .
 I told you that volcanic ash was just tiny little rocks with very sharp edges . I told CNN.com that volcanic . ash was a tiny little rock that had sharp edges on it .
 Even a light dusting of volcanic ash poses a health hazard to people and animals . The ash can damage crops, electronics, and machinery .
 Just for once in your life, accept things as they are and don’t try to make them perfect . Acceptance is the most important thing you can ever do, and accept it .
 When a weapon misfires, you eject the defective cartridge and go to the next one . When you eject a defective cartridge, it's not easy to eject it. You eject it, eject it and move it to another .
 Never attribute to malice that which can't be adequately explained by stupidity . Hanlon's Razor: If the shoe fits, wear it. Never attribute . malice that can be attributed to stupidity .
 "We ordered the different flashhiders for the Ml 4 that had the bayonet lugs. Yeah, we ordered the . different flash hiders for . the . Ml . 4 . That flashhider is the same flash hider for the . 4 that has the
 We even bought the M6 bayonets with the olive-drab fiberglass body with steel throat and drag . The M6 has a fiberglass frame and steel throat .
 "If you get close enough to use a bayonet, you’re too close. My son always says that if you get . close to using a . bayonet . You're too close to the bayonet. You're not close to it, you're too far .
 The charge will be $40 for the service call and $40 to rectify the problem . He looks and says the charge is $40 . He says it will cost $40.
 The other difference is that if you lose a little Freon, the plumber wants $40 for the service call, $100/pound for the Freon and so much a pound to let it go from his bottle .
 He doesn't know that you know a guy who will sell you all the Freon you want for $12 a pound . He doesn’t know that . You know he knows that you can buy Freon from a guy he knows .
 You can do it yourself, since you watched him connect the lines before you told him NO, you can . And, since he watched him do it, he can help you do it himself .
 He had open-heart surgery and one of the networks reported he died and when the funeral was. One of the network's networks reported that he died . The funeral was .
 The title was, in part, to reassure his fans that he was still alive and kicking . The title of his book was, part of an attempt to reassure fans he is still alive, kicking .
 Sharon and Sharon remain convinced that he once worked for WHO radio in De Moines, Iowa . Sharon and I remain convinced of his connection to the radio station .
 Jerry Reed and Jerry Reno are Jerry Reno and Jerry Reed . Reed and Reno are known to be the co-founder of Reno, Nevada, Nevada . Reed says he's not Jerry Reno .
 It is issued with a special sheath designed to double as a wire cutter . It was developed by Qual-A-Tec from the Buck Buckmaster line .
 The design had some origins in designs for SEAL teams and Rambo movies . The design was inspired by Rambo films .
 The design was later sold commercially as the Buck 188, though the design was widely copied and sold by other makers . The Buck 188 was sold commercially in the mid 1950s .
 In 1986 a patent on Buckmasters’ that had been applied for was granted was granted, to help cut-down on knockoffs . In 1986 the patent was granted to help reduce the number of knockoffs of Buckmasters .
 The M9 Bayonet partially replaced, but is used in addition to the older M6 and M7 Bayonets, introduced in 1957 and 1964 respectively respectively .
 Many troops have retained the M7, since the M9 has a reputation for breakage, due to a combination of its relatively thin blade, and varying quality among the various contractors used .
 It has some extra features, such as a hammer pommel, but uses the same knife and scabbard as the M9 . It has an extra pommel feature, such an extra feature, but it is not a full version of the original .
 We speculated that we’d still be getting ash a day or two after the eruption stopped . The eruption stopped a few days ago .
 The winds on the backside of the low were circulating the ash in our direction and being stalled we got more ashfall than one might have expected . The winds were circulating ash in the direction of the ash .
 The weather wasn’t cooperating, but finally the high weakened and the low pushed through . The weather isn't cooperating with the weather .
 With the low gone, the wind blew out of the west and the ash died down . With the ash finally dying down, the ash fell back to normal levels .
 Wet ash, however, usually exhibits cohesive properties that can dramatically decrease such reworking and disturbance . Wet ash is usually more cohesive than wet ash, which can significantly decrease disturbance .
 The resistance to wind erosion of compacted ash will increase as grains nest more tightly together . The resistance of wind erosion is expected to increase in future .
 St. Helens' 1980 ash showed initial resistance to wetting as water beaded on its surface . The 1980 ash from the Mountaineer's Mountaintaintaint was the first to be covered in water .
 This resistance lasted for only a few hours in light rain and was eliminated by heavy rain in minutes . However, this resistance lasted only for a short time . Heavy rain was eliminated within minutes .
 After initial wetting, an undisturbed ash layer may remain persistently wet . Undurbed ash layers may remain persistent wet .
 This is due to the inefficient water drainage from between the surfaces of ash grains, which are particularly angular . Water drainage is inefficient between the surface of the ash grains and the surface is angular .
 Raindrops impacting on an ash layer contribute to rapid compaction through decreasing porosity . Raindrops impact on ash layers contribute to rapidly compaction . The ash layer has decreased porosity, resulting in rapid compactions .
 Pore space saturation will then occur relatively rapidly during heavy rain . Pores space saturation occurs relatively rapidly when heavy rain occurs .
 In the 1964 Irazu eruption in Costa Rica fine-grained soft, loose ash formed a hard impervious surface crust . The crust is thought to be a result of precipitation of soluble salts by evaporation .
 When the ash began to fall during daylight hours, the sky turned increasingly hazy and dusty and sometimes a pale yellow color . We had it all, when the ash .
 The falling ash was so dense that daylight turned to murky gray and later an intense blackness such that it was impossible to see your hand when held up close to the eye . Daylight turned to a murky gray, then a dense blackness .
 Loud thunder and lightning and the strong smell of sulfur occurred during the ash fall . Loud thunder, lightning and a strong smell were heard during the fall .
 Rain accompanied the ash and turned the tiny particles into a slurry of slippery mud .
 You could describe it as an intense quietness, except for thunder that may accompany the ash fall, giving deadness to the normal sounds of life . The quietness of the fall can be described as intense and intense .
 The most serious problems to communications systems result from the conductive and abrasive properties of ash . Most serious problems are caused by conductives and abrasives in ash .
 The wholesale price of propane had slowly risen and was sitting at around $1.75 . On 9/30/05, propane was $1 .19; on 9/31/05 it was $ 1.19 .
 An engine doesn't use the BTUs in a gallon of propane with total efficiency . It’s cheaper because an engine doesn’t use the . BTUs . An engine does not use . the BTU in a . gallon of gas . It's cheaper .
 The downside of the thunderstorms was the risk we had for a lightning strike . The risk of lightning strike was also the risk of flooding in parts of Florida .
 "I had Alpha Delta surge protectors on everything and standby power supplies," she says . She says she had surge protection on everything, including standby generators .
 A computer or radio can crash in the time it takes a generator to kick in . 500w seemed to be a reasonable balance to allow the generator to stabilize. 500w was a reasonable amount .
 In Palmdale, I had a Best 1.7kw UPS that plugged into the one special outlet I had in my office . The UPS plugged into a special outlet in his office .
 When I returned home from my 2nd childhood, the thing wouldn’t work and I never fixed it . When I went back to my childhood, it wouldn't work . I'm not sure how long it will be .
 APC are cheap, both inexpensive and questionable quality, but they only need to work for 5 minutes or less . This time around, I went with APC because they were cheap and both inexpensive . APC were both questionable quality .
 A standby power supply is a good choice these days because they use microprocessor switching . On the subject, a standby power supplies are good choices because of microprocessor switches .
 The problem with a true UPS is that they lose energy to heat because they use the power to charge a battery, which is run through an inverter to supply power to your equipment . This is a truly uninterruptible, but inefficient, but efficient, UPS is inefficient .
 In the past the greatest problem with the non-true UPS units was the switching time. The problem was switching time, which is when the UPS unit is not a true UPS unit .
 Large companies have servers protected but don't bother protecting networks, printers and individual computers . Many large companies have their servers protected, but they don’t bother protecting individual computers and networks .
 If the individual computers and printers are down, nobody can work anymore . "If you're in trouble, you can't work anymore. If you're not working, you're going to lose your job," says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 The United States violent crime rate declined 2. percent last year, continuing a decade-long downward trend in serious offenses, the FBI said Monday . The FBI says the rate of violent crime in the U.S. fell 2.1 percent in 2013 .
 The annual report offers no reasons for the trends, but the data provides criminologists with raw material to examine . Criminologists and academics can examine the data .
 I know, but it’s raining and the air is clearing and I don’t feel like telling you about what we had to go through, it was awful. I know. I don't feel like . I know . It’ll be raining again, but
 Yellowstone.pdf file is a Yellowstone .pdf file . It was created for Yellowstone, Wyoming, Wyoming .
 Yellowstone's explosive caldera forming eruptions occurred when large volumes of rhyolitic magma accumulated at shallow levels in the Earth’s crust, as little as 3 miles below the surface . The eruptions were caused by rhyolitics magma, which accumulated in shallow levels
 Magma, charged with dissolved gas, then moved upward, stressing the crust and generating earthquakes . This highly viscous magma then stresses the crust, stressing it out of the earth .
 Eruptions of rhyolite have been responsible for forming many of the world’s calderas, such as those at Katmai National Park, Alaska .
 A foreshock isn't a foreshock until after you get the really big quake like the M8. that hit the San Andreas Fault. No, Virginia, they can’t predict earthquakes, because they can't predict earthquakes. Foreshocks aren't foreshocks until after
 With the caldera forming eruptions, the magma moves upward causing the earthquakes so it’s an entirely different situation . The volcano's eruption is the result of the volcano's calderalization .
 "I loved that and about 10,000 other songs, but only by the original artists," she says . She says she loved that song, but it was only by original artists .
 One person would record a song and someone else would re-record it and get a bigger hit . Sometimes that wasn’t always the case, because one of the songs would be re-recorded and re-released .
 In 1956, Perkins wrote the song Blue Suede Shoes on an old potato sack . Perkins was a desperately poor and struggling performer .
 Foxx appeared to be making a comeback with the 1991 series The Royal Family . He died of a fatal heart attack on the set of the series . Foxx co-starred with long-time friend Della Reese .
 When you’re a recovering alcoholic in your 60s, about the only thing you have going for you is your humor . This week's episode will be re-imagined as an episode of a comedy series .
 You didn't quit drinking soon enough to keep your body from taking a dump . You sure can’t go back and un-drink the booze. You didn”t quit drinking .
 If you spring for a generator, get one that runs at 1,800rpm, it will last longer . Get a generator with a low-rpm generator that will keep you out of trouble .
 Find a public shelter, but avoid the Super Dome or the Convention Center in New Orleans . Find the public shelter at a New Orleans public shelter .
 You’d be far better off evacuating, just don’t ride on a bus full of oxygen bottles . Don’s not going to ride on oxygen bottles, but you’ll be better off .
 I didn't know he was the mechanic responsible for keeping the brakes up. I didn’t know he’d been the mechanic . I’m not sure what happened to him .
 President Bush acknowledged that Harriet E Miers' religious beliefs were among the reasons he nominated her to the Supreme Court . Bush spokesman Scott McClellan reassured reporters that the nominee's faith would play no role in her decision-making on the bench .
 If confirmed, Miers' evangelical Christian faith would dictate her rulings, critics say . They fear that, if confirmed, she would be a judge on the issue .
 They are concerned that the president's acknowledgment of his nominee's evangelism was his way of signaling her opposition to a constitutional right to an abortion as established in Roe vs. Roe .
 Clarence Thomas stopped an abortion for an inmate in Missouri, but the Court overturned his stay . Thomas: "I'm not going to let it go, but I'm going to stop it" Thomas' stay was overturned .
 A long train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to re129 duce them under absolute despotism . It is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security
 Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies; and such is now the necessity, which constrains them to alter their former systems of government . The colonies are now in need of a new system of government, says President Lincoln .
 Maybe I should just slap him upside the head and reduce the charge to Assault and Battery . Maybe I'm not alone, I'm just trying to get him to apologize for his actions .
 The jerk will sue and own the house, especially if you happen to live in California . Then the jerk will claim the house and own it .
 I can express an opinion that his parents weren't married when he was born or that he has his head where the sun doesn’t shine . "I can express a . opinion that he . had his parents . not married or that his head . doesn't shine. I can
 If you survive a disaster, and you have a minimum of preparations, you’ll probably make it . If you have even a minimum, you'll probably be able to make it, says CNN.com .