 How the Cold War and conflicts in Korea and Vietnam influenced domestic and international politics . Standard 4: Historical Research Capabilities A Formulate historical questions. Formulate history questions. A
 B Marshal evidence of antecedent circumstances and contemporary factors contributing to problems and alternative courses of action . B Marshal: "There are antecedents and current circumstances contributing to these problems"
 Students will analyze the primary and secondary sources focusing on the main idea and significance . Students will also analyze the main ideas and significance of each source .
 Thirteen days in October 1962 was one of the most intense periods in American and Soviet history . The 13-day stand-off was the longest period in history between U.S. and Russia .
 During Eisenhower’s administration, the dictator of Cuba was General Fulgencio Batista Zaldívar who was friendly with the U.S. During Eisenhower's administration, Batista was friendly to the United States .
 Khrushchev gave a number of explanations for the ""defend-Cuba theory:"" According to Mark White, the Soviet leader gave a variety of reasons for the theory .
 Garthoff: "There were two lessons – one learned and one not learned" Garthoffs: "One learned, one not. One learned"
 The geopolitical rivalry continued for another quarter of a century, as did the arms race . Each side continued to seek strategic advantages when opportunities arose .
 The crisis evoked miscalculations and misperceptions and frightened Soviet and American leaders into the realization that a change in policy was the only way to avert a nuclear war .
 The Traditional and Revisionist Interpretations Reevaluated,” Diplomatic History 14 : 490.23Raymond L Garthoff, A Journey Through The Cold War A Memoir of Containment and Coexistence , 165.24Ibid., 183.
 Discussion on the policy choices confronting the United States and Soviet leaders . Closure: Lead a class discussion on the policies confronting the U.S.
 Letter to Nikita Khrushchev from Fidel Castro regarding defending Cuban air space . MRBM Field Launch Site RS #09 Missle Range Map RS #10 Mapping an Event . RS #11 Maps an Event.
 Letter from President Kennedy to Chairman Khrushchev, October 22, 1962 . Fidel Castro is offering assistance in confronting the situation . Letter: Fidel Castro offers assistance to confront situation .
 Letter from Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy, October 24, 1962 . Students will place the letter under during the crisis to establish confrontation .
 CHE has in good faith secured or sought permission from identifiable copyright holders to reproduce materials for educational use, following fair-use guidelines .