 Dickson Musslewhite Acquisitions Editor: Charlyce Owen-Jones . Senior Managing Editor: Ann Marie McCarthy Project Manager: Carol O’Rourke Eull .
 Refugees from Kyrgzstan receive help from UNICEF, 2010, Hrc/ Wenn Photos/Newscom, UN Secretary-Ceneral Ban Ki Moon with PSY, 2012, PSY.com .
 Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 . To obtain permission to use material from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson .
 NATO campaign in Afghanistan is winding down; Erance has routed Islamists from northern Mali, as has the African Union in most of Somalia . U.S. defense budget has begun a sharp decline .
 Cyberwarfare, such as the Elame virus and expanding drone attacks, also contributes to the changing international security picture covered in this edition of this edition .
 XV A Note on Nonnenclature: Names are politically sensitive . Different actors may call a territory or an event by different names .
 Both governments and intergovernmental organizations play key roles in international relations and employ millions of people with interests and training in IR . Despite differences between careers in IGOs and governments, there are numerous similarities .
 Admission into and promotion in these organizations is regulated by exams, performance evaluations, and tenure with the organization . Whether in the U.S. or State Department or the UN, entrance into these organizations has been regulated .
 Governments face competing pressures of public opinion, constituencies, and interests groups . An IGO’s constituents are states, which in many cases disagree among themselves .
 Both work environments attract coworkers with deep interests in international affairs . The resulting networks of contracts can bring professional and intellectual rewards . Jobs in governments or IGOs may involve travel or living abroad .
 Usually only individuals with advanced degrees or technical specializations achieve non-entry level positions . It can take years to climb within the organization and the process may involve working in departments far from your original interests .
 Do not assume that to work in foreign affairs, one must be a diplomat . For example, the State Department is only one of many parts of the U.S. government that deal with IR .
 People follow various your own time schedule, balancing other duties (such as an interest in teaching and researching in the work as a teaching or research assistant) that can easfield of international relations .
 One advantage of an academic and research career is intellectual freedom . Academic and research careers include teaching, research and research .
 Ifiih .i'.,■k North SOd M ■ Smotfnsk JlRELAND . Veipwi I “ ^ KINGDOM v Anr^f’fdn ''-VCartlP, ''- VCartl .P,
 International relations is a fascinating topic because it concerns peoples and cultures throughout the world . Watch the video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Globalization, International Relations, and Daily Life .
 The scope and complexity of the interactions among these groups make international relations a difficult subject to master . International relations is a challenging subject for international relations experts .
 Identity communities play important roles in overcoming difficult collective goods problems, including the issue of who contributes to development assistance, world health, and UN peacekeeping missions . 7 of people contribute to international disaster relief funds after tsunamis, earthquakes or hurricanes because of a shared identity .
 For thousands of years the man has made the decision and the woman has followed it, I suggest you do the same, and buy season tickets to the opera . This would be a dominance solution, says the author of the book .
 The “big five” with the largest nuclear arsenals hold veto power on the UN Security Council . Through agreements like the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Proliferation Security Initiative, the existing nuclear powers actively try to keep their exclusive hold on these weapons .
 Examples include stopping genocide, enhancing world trade and slowing global warming . Aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, New Jersey, 2012 .
 There is a close connection between scholars in colleges, universities, and think tanks and policy-making community working in the government . Some professors serve in government .
 Condoleezza Rice became national security advisor in 2001 and secretary of state in 2005 under President George W, Bush . Sometimes professors publicize their ideas about foreign policy through newspaper columns or TV interviews .
 Diplomats, bureaucrats, and politicians can benefit from the knowledge produced by IR scholars,""^ Theoretical debates in the field of IR are fundamental, but unresolved,^ It will be up to the next generation of IR scholars to achieve a better understanding of how world politics works,"
 IR is about international politics —the decisions of governments about foreign actors, especially other governments,^ To some extent, however, however. As a part of political science, IR is .
 International politics is interdisciplinary, relating international politics to economics, history, sociology, and other disciplines . Explore the Simulation 'You are a United States Senator'" at MyPoliSciLab . Explore simulation 'You Are a United . States Senator' at the lab .
 Most IR teachers teach IR in political science classes, but not IR . The focus is on the politics of economic relationships or environmental management . IR is a form of social justice in the United States, but IR can be used in politics .
 Eor a given puzzle, various theories can explain the result as a case of a more general principle . A given puzzle can be explained by a theory or theory .
 The principal actors in IR are the world’s governments . Watch the video 'Conflict Diamonds and the Kimberley Process"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 Each is an important actor in world affairs, especially the nine in the center that are largest in both population and economy . A few of these large states possess especially great military and economic strength and influence .
 The most powerful of great powers, those with truly global influence, have been called superpowers . They are defined and discussed in Chapter 2, The Most Powerful of Great Powers .
 Taiwan is the most important political entity in the world . Some other political entities are often referred to as states or countries although they are not formally recognized as states . Taiwan is one of these countries .
 Hong Kong reverted from British to Chinese rule in 1997 and retains a somewhat separate identity under China’s “one country, two systems” formula . Puerto Rico, Bermuda, Martinique, French Guiana, the Falkland Islands, the Netherlands Antilles and Guam .
 The status of the Vatican in Rome is ambiguous, as is that of Palestine . Palestine joined the Vatican as the UN’s only nonmember observer states in 2012 . The Vatican is the only Vatican observer state in the UN .
 There is no single pattern to NGOs. Sometimes NGOs combine efforts through transnational advocacy networks. Sometimes they combine efforts with transnational networks .
 State of Ohio operates an International Trade Division to promote exports and foreign investment . The actions of substate economic actors create the context of economic activity against which international political events play out, and within which governments must operate .
 The global level of analysis seeks to explain international outcomes in terms of global trends and forces that transcend the interactions of states themselves .
 States are losing authority to supranational institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the European Union . The values of technocrats and elite citizens in liberal democracies are becoming global values, reflecting an emerging global civilization .
 The old North-South division is seen as less important, because the global South is moving in divergent directions depending on countries’ and regions’ integration with world markets . A second perspective is skeptical of these claims about globalization .
 As the world economy becomes more integrated, markets and production are becoming global in scope . Popular debates focus on the growing power of large corporations operating globally, the disruptive costs associated with joining world markets .
 Global Geography 21 WTO and the Policies to expand free trade are a central focus of antiglobalization protesters . Street protests have turned host cities into besieged fortresses in Seattle, Washington, D.C, ; Quebec and Genoa, Italy .
 These world regions differ from each other in the number of states they contain and in each region’s particular mix of cultures, cultures, geographical realities, and languages . But each represents a geographical corner of the world, and together they reflect the overall larger divisions . Together, they reflect
 Erom Korea, for example, China and Russia are to the west, and Japan and the U.S. to the east . Erom Korean is located in China, Russia and Japan .
 Two world wars were global or hegemonic wars in which almost all major states participated in an all-out struggle over the future of the interna' 1 1 tional system . With perhaps just two other cases in history, the Thirty Years’ War and the Napoleonic
 The Two World Wars, 1900-1950 Europe mobilization plans developed Balkan crises World War 1 Sarajevo United States enters war — Italy invades Ethiopia Munich Agreement . Germany naval arms race with Britain with Britain CD CD H— CD H .
 After a century of relative peace, the great powers marched off to battle for no good reason . U.S. Defense Department ro 28 Chapter 28 .
 A Serbian nationalist assassinated Archduke Ferdinand of Austria in 1914 in Sarajevo, a minor crisis '1 '1'1 escalated and the mobilization plans pushed Europe to all-out war .
 Hitler then double-crossed Stalin and invaded the Soviet Union in 194h . This offensive ultimately bogged down and was turned back after several years . Hitler's invasion of Russia was a major success for the Nazis .
 The Soviet Union took the brunt of the German attack and suffered by far the greatest share of the 60 million deaths caused by World War II . This trauma continues to be a powerful memory that shapes views of IR in Russia and Eastern Europe .
 Allied forces crossed the English Channel on June 6, 1944 . British-American forces pushed into Germany from the west while the Soviets pushed from the east . Germany surrendered and was occupied by the allied powers .
 In 1961, East Germany built the Berlin Wall separating East from West Berlin . It symbolized the division of Europe by what Winston Churchill had called the “iron curtain” Gaddis, John Lewis.
 The United Nations (unlike the ill-fated League of Nations) managed to maintain almost universal membership and adherence to basic structures and rules throughout the Cold War era . Although the Soviet bloc did not join Western economic institutions such as the IME, all the world’s major
 The West feared the Soviet Union might gain control of Western Europe during the Cold War . This could have put the entire industrial base of the Eurasian landmass (from Europe to Siberia) under one state .
 The Marshall Plan —U.S., financial aid to rebuild European economies —responded to these fears . The Marshall plan —U,S. financial aid —responds to those fears, as did the creation of NATO .
 U.S. sought to halt the expansion of Soviet influence globally on several levels . Much spending was also devoted to a superpower nuclear arms race, in which each superpower produced tens of thousands of nuclear weapons .
 U.S. foreign policy in subsequent decades came to serve the goal of containment . Virtually all of U,S, foreign policy came to the end of the Cold War .
 The Chinese communist revolution in 1949 led to a Sino-Soviet alliance . China opposed Soviet moves toward peaceful coexistence with the U.S. In the late 1960s, young radicals, opposed to both superpowers, ran China .
 During the Cold War, China generally tried to play a balancer role against whichever superpower seemed most threatening at the time . But feeling threatened by Soviet power, China’s leaders developed a growing affiliation with the United States during the 1970s .
 In 1950, communist North Korea attacked and overran most of U.S.-allied South Korea . The war bogged down near the original border until a 1953 truce ended the fighting . China sent masses of "volunteers" to help North Korea .
 Some U.S. policy makers favored military strikes before the missiles became operational . Some nuclear weapons in Cuba were already operational and commanders were authorized to use them in the event of a United States attack .
 The costs of the Gulf War were shared among the participants in the coalition . Britain and Erance making Herrmann, Richard K., and R Ned Lebow. The costs were shared .
 Of the former Soviet republics, only the three small Baltic states and Georgia are nonmembers of the CIS . The republics became independent states and formed the CIS, but are now part of the group .
 Western relations with Russia and the other republics have been mixed since the 1990s . Because of their own economic problems, and because of a sense that Russia needed internal reform more than external aid, they have had mixed relations .
 Russia's brutal suppression of its secessionist province of Chechnya in 1995 and 1999 provoked Western fears of an expansionist, aggressive Russian nationalism . Russian leaders feared NATO expansion into Eastern Europe that placed threatening Western military forces on Russia’s borders . Western countries provided only limited aid for
 The world's great powers overall increased cooperation after the Cold War . Russia and the United States agreed to major reductions in their nuclear weapons in the 1990s . Japan and Russia could not resolve a lingering, mostly symbolic, territorial dispute,^^
 Ethnic Serbs, who were minorities in Croatia and Bosnia, seized territory to form a ‘Greater Serbia’ With help from Serbia, which controlled the Yugoslav army, they killed hundreds of thousands of non-Serb Bosnians and Croatians .
 In 1995, Serbian forces overran two UN-designated ‘safe areas’ in eastern Bosnia, expelling the women and slaughtering thousands of the men . In contrast to the Gulf War, the great powers showed no willingness to bear major costs to protect Bosnia . Instead they
 The treaty to end the war (authored by U,S, negotiators) formally held Bosnia together but granted Serbian forces autonomy on half of their territory . Serbia placed about 60,000 heavily armed troops on the ground to maintain a cease-fire . The treaty was signed by the U,
 Serbian strongman Slobodan +Treedman, Lawrence, and Efraim Karsh. Meanwhile, Serbia's former strongman .
 In Rwanda in 1994, the genocide of more than half a million civilians in a matter of weeks was virtually ignored by the international community . However, when those forces were drawn into the fighting and sustained casualties, the United States abruptly pulled out of the fighting .
 The U.S. military intervened in Haiti to restore the elected president, but Haiti remains mired in poverty .
 New rifts opened in 2001 between the United States and both China and Europe, possibly signaling a realignment against U,S, predominance in world affairs . Russia and China signed a treaty of friendship in 2001, and European countries voted the U.S. off two important UN commissions
 Prance and Germany bitterly opposed the Iraq war, as did millions of protesters around the world . The great power divisions reappeared as the U.S. and Britain tried to assemble a coalition to oust Saddam Hussein .
 A U.S. military force of 250,000 troops with advanced technology overpowered the Iraqi army in three weeks . The invasion itself was brief and decisive .
 Realism is a school of thought that explains international relations in terms of power . The exercise of power by states toward each other is sometimes called realpolitik, or just power politics .
 Capabilities are easier to measure than influence and are less circular in logic . States possess varying amounts of population, territory, military forces, and so forth .
 The method followed in this book adjusts for price differences among countries, but an alternative method gives GDP estimates that are, on average, about 50 percent higher for countries in the global North . GDP is a useful estimator of material capabilities but not a precise one .
 Other capabilities allow actors to exercise influence in the short term . Japan built up military capabilities over the next few years that gradually matched those of Japan .
 To the extent that one element of power can be converted into another, it is fungible . "It's fungible. It's not just a matter of power, it's not only power, but it's power to power itself," says Obama .
 Robert Gates called for a “dramatic increase” in spending on diplomacy and economic aid . Despite very high military spending, these “other elements of national power” have lagged behind in an era of asymmetric warfare .
 The most basic norms of the international system have changed little in recent centuries . Norms of state interactions closely adhere to shared expectations about what behavior is considered proper .
 Integration of global economic markets and telecommunications makes it easier for ideas to penetrate state borders . For example, election monitors increasingly watch internal elections for fraud, while international organizations monitor ethnic conflicts for genocide .
 The territorial nature of the interstate system developed long ago when agrarian societies relied on agriculture to generate wealth . The International System 51 PASSPORT PLEASE 1 .
 Realists acknowledge that the rules of IR often create a security dilemma . States’ actions taken to ensure their own security threaten the security of other states . The responses of those other states, such as deploying more of their own military forces, threaten the first state .
 Other small states may, '1 'Z for domestic reasons, fail to mobilize to balance against threats . '1'Z' is 'Z' for domestic . reasons, may not be able to mobilize .
 Balance-of-power theory would predict closer relations among Russia, China, and even Europe to balance U.S. power . In the post-Cold War era of United States dominance, the theory predicts closer relations with Russia and China . Balance of power theory would have predicted closer relations
 A/ei/i/i York T/mes from Pew Giobai Attitudes Project .
 Great powers are generally considered the halTdozen or so most powerful states . Although there is no firm dividing line, great powers are considered the most powerful state .
 Japan and Germany are economically great powers, but both countries have played constrained roles in international security affairs since World War II . Nonetheless, both have large and capable military forces, which they have begun to deploy abroad .
 A list of middle powers might include midsized countries of the global North such as Canada, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Poland, Ukraine, South Korea, and Australia . It could also include large or influential countries in the global South such as India, Indonesia, Brazil, Argentina,
 United States foreign policy has historically alternated between internationalist and isolationist moods . U.S. foreign policy often alternates between internationalism and isolationism moods, says CNN's John Sutter .
 U.S. leaders after that war feared Soviet communism and pushed U,S. public opinion toward a strong internationalism during the Cold War . The United States became an activist, global superpower during that era .
 In the post-Cold War era, U.S. internationalism was tempered by a new cost consciousness, and by the emergence of a new isolationist camp born in reaction to the displacements caused by globalization and free trade . The terrorist attacks of September 2001 renewed public support for U
 The United States role in Afghanistan is still uncertain, but the U.S. role is uncertain . Its ability and willi n• ati • i ingness to resume a role as hegemon—as after World War II—are important .
 A second area of U,S. ambivalence is unilateralism versus multilateralism when the U.S. does engage internationally . The United States is ambivalent about whether to engage in multilateral cooperation .
 Multilateral approaches—working through international institutions—augment U.S. power and reduce costs, but limit U,S. freedom of action . Multilateral approach to U.N. power: "U,S., power, reduces costs and reduces costs," says Obama . Mult
 Robert J. Lieber, Robert J Eagle Rules/ Foreign Policy and American Primacy in the 21st Century . Lieber: "American Primacy" is a concept of a state of state in the United States .
 The Hapsburg countries were defeated by mostly Protestant countries in northern Europe in the Thirty Years' War of 1618-1616 . The 1648 Treaty of Westphalia established the basic rules that have defined the international system .
 The Great Power System, 1500-2000 O) N9 Wars Spain conquers Portugal Spanish Armada 30 Years' War Napoleonic Wars War of the Spanish Succession 7 years' War FrancoPrussian War World War I World Warn Cold War Major Alliances Turkey vs. Turkey vs
 Realists emphasize the fluidity of alliances . This happened to Iraq when it invaded Kuwait in 1990, as it had to Hitler’s Germany in the 1940s . Realists say this happened to France in the 1800s and Germany in 1940s, and to Hitler's Germany in
 Langer, William L European Alliances and Alignments, 1871—1890. Our interests are perpetual and eternal and those interests it is our duty to follow,”""""""
 Richard Nixon could cooperate with communist Mao Zedong in 1972, Joseph Stalin could sign a nonaggression pact with a fascist, Adolf Hitler, and then cooperate with the capitalist West against Hitler . The United States could back Islamic militants in Afghanistan against the Soviet Union in the 1980s, then
 If there were only two states, each could match capabilities to have adequate defense but an inability to attack successfully . The fluidity of alliances deepens the security dilemma (see p, 51)
 Great powers often form alliances with smaller states, sometimes called client states . Even when alliance cohesion is high, conflicts may arise over who bears costs of the alliance .
 Extended deterrence refers to a strong state’s use of threats to deter attacks on weaker clients . Great powers face real danger of being dragged into wars with each other over relatively unimportant regional issues if their respective clients go to war .
 The Soviet Union worried that its commitments to China in the 1950s, to Cuba in the 1960s, may end up fighting a costly war . Alliances generally result from a convergence of practical interests, not sentimental or ideological reasons, not ideological reasons .
 At present, two important formal alliances dominate the international security scene . Alliances 65 and to Syria and Egypt in the 1970s could result in a disastrous war with the United States, NATO says .
 The 28 NATO members possess nearly half the world's power . By far the more powerful is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization . The second is the U,S.-Japanese alliance .
 NATO military staffs from the member countries coordinate plans and periodically direct exercises in the field . Members of the United States, Canada, Britain, Norway, Iceland, Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Slovenia, Slovakia
 Since 2006, these forces, known as the International Security Assistance Eorces, have been under NATO leadership . NATO leadership has been in charge of these forces .
 Over 100,000 troops serve in the ISAE, with NATO states providing the bulk of the forces . NATO states provide the majority of the troops .
 NATO alliance has been the world's strongest military force since 1949; its misground forces cross into Iraq . Longtime members France and GerALLIANCE OF THE STRONG many strongly opposed the war . Turkey refused to let the United States .
 The alliance was created in 1951 against the potential Soviet threat to Japan . Because of its roots in the U.S. military occupation of Japan after World War II, the alliance is very asymmetrical .
 The United States is committed to defend Japan if it is attacked, but Japan is not similarly obligated to defend the United States . The U.S. maintains troops in Japan, but not vice versa .
 Japan’s constitution renounces the right to make war and maintain military forces . Japan maintains military forces, called the Self-Defense Forces, strong enough for territorial defense but not for aggression . U,S. share of total military power in this alliance is far greater than its share
 NATO member states pledged their assistance in fighting the forces of al Qaeda and its Taliban protectors in Afghanistan . The forces are trying to provide security for the fledgling Afghan government, train a new military, and build political institutions .
 The war has become a controversial political issue in nearly every country contributing troops to ISAF . Pro-Taliban forces continue to carry out widespread attacks and threaten to undermine progress made to date . NATO members have been stingy in committing troops to the NATO mission .
 U.S. has used the alliance with Japan as a base to project power in Asia . In the 2010 “surge,” America added 30,000 troops and other NATO members only 10,000 . The allies face DOMINANCE Alliances 69
 The continued U-Smilitary presence in Japan symbolizes the U-S.commitment to remain engaged in Asian security affairs .
 U.S. forces have drawn down somewhat in the past decade in response to high costs, reduced threats, and more American focus on the Middle East . In 2010, the alliance became a major political issue in Japan as its prime minister, Yukio Hatoyama, resigned after re
 The U,S. maintains military alliances with several other states, including Australia and South Korea . The U.S. collaboration with militaries in other states such as Israel make them de facto allies .
 Commonwealth of Independent States comprises former Soviet republics except the Baltic states . Russia, the official successor state to the Soviet Union, is the leading member of the group .
 NATO is not really a club of equals, but a hierarchy with one member having more military might than the others combined . The solution to the collective goods problem in this case was for the dominant power to provide the good, NATO says .
 U.S. relations with Libya were also hostile for decades until a 2003 agreement, and became very friendly after Libya’s U,S.-backed revolution in 2011 . It is unclear what new international alignments may emerge in the years to come .
 For the present, international alignments—both military alliances and trade relationships—center on the United States . China, Russia, and France keep U.S. hegemony in check . Little evidence exists of a coherent or formal rival power alignment emerging to challenge the U,S.
 Your population is still angered by the Chinese victory in the 1962 Sino-Indian war and the disputed border territory that gave rise to the conflict . Your people are still angry by the loss of their territory to China .
 If deterrence works, its effects are almost invisible; its success is measured in attacks that did not occur,^' Generally, advocates of deterrence believe that conflicts are more likely to escalate into war when one party is weak .
 A strategy of compellence, sometimes used after deterrence fails, refers to the threat of force to make another actor take some action . Building up military capabilities usually convinces the stronger party that a resort to military leverage would not succeed .
 In theory, the less severe actions establish credibility, showing the first actor’s willingness to exert its power on the issue . These actions should induce the second actor to comply, assuming that it finds the potential costs of escalating punishments greater than the costs of compliance . The pattern of escalation
 The unitary actor assumption holds that states make important decisions as though they were single individuals able to act in the national interest . The arms race process was illustrated vividly in the U,S.-Soviet nuclear arms race .
 Realists assume that those who wield power while engaging in statecraft behave as rational actors . This view has two implications for IR, ^^Isard, Walter, and Charles H Anderton .
 Michael E. Brown, Michael E., Owen R Cote, Sean M Lynn-Jones, and Steven E Miller, eds. eds . Brown, . Miller, . Cote and . Miller . Brown . Miller: "It's been a great year for the U.
 Just as firms compete for money in economic markets, states compete for A.'l power in the international system . States compete for power in international system, says Julian Zelizer .
 Chicken represents two male teenagers speeding toward a head-on collision . Chicken represents a pair of male teens speeding to a head on collision. Chicken represents the two male teens .
 Kant’s first answer was that states could develop organizations and rules to facilitate cooperation, specifically by forming a world federation resembling the United Nations . Kant's second answer, operating at a lower level of analysis, was that peace depends on the internal character of governments . This answer forms the
 Neoliberals say to realists, “Even if we grant your assumptions about the nature of states and their motives, your pessimistic conclusions do not follow,” states achieve cooperation fairly often because it is in their interest to do so .
 Neoliberals argue reciprocity can be an effective strategy for achieving cooperation in a situation of conflicting interests . Liberal theories emphasize the potential for rivalries to evolve into cooperative relationships as states recognize that achieving mutual benefits is most cost effective .
 The current revolution in information technologies is strengthening regimes particularly in this aspect . Regimes can help solve collective goods problems by increasing transparency, says Stephen Krasner .
 The UN and other lOs provide a stable framework for resolving disputes . IPE is even more institutionalized, again because of the heavier volume of activity and the wealth realized from cooperation .
 Important institutions in international security and IPE are discussed in Chapters 7 and 8 . These bureaucracies, however, can also promote policies not intended by the states that created the institutions .
 The culmination of liberal institutionalism to date is the European Union . After centuries of devastating wars, European states now enjoy a stable peace among themselves with strong international institutions to bind them .
 The concept of collective security grows out of liberal institutionalism, refers to the formation of most major actors in an international system for the purpose of jointly opposing aggression by any actor . Kant laid out the rationale for this approach .
 In the 1980s, the U.S. got into a series of conflicts with the UN about how much the U,S. dues should be . The United States was involved in a dispute with the United Nations over how much it should pay .
 After World War II, the United Nations was created as the League’s successor to promote collective security . Several regional IGOs also perform collective security functions as well as economic and cultural ones .
 A second requisite for collective security is that enough members must agree on what constitutes aggression . Suppressing a determined aggressor can be very costly, a second must be very clear .
 The UN Security Council is structured so that aggression is defined by what all five permanent members, in addition to at least four of the other ten members, can agree on . This collective security system does not work against aggression by a great power .
 The UN Foundation, founded in 1998 with a large contribution by media mogul Ted Turner, started a campaign to use the identity principle to solve the problem of U,S. nonpayment of dues .
 The United States began to catch up on arrears, and in 2009, it paid up the last of its back obligations . Wanting to be and seen as, a great nation, America paid its bills .
 When the UN did not act, the United States, Britain, and Australia sent military forces and overthrew Saddam Hussein by force, comparing the UN to the toothless League of Nations . However, the U,S, forces found no weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, and then found
 The Democratic Peace Kant argued that lasting peace would depend on states’ becoming republics, with legislatures to check the power of monarchs to make war . Kant said lasting peace depends on states becoming republic .
 IR scholars have linked democracy with a kind of foreign policy fundamentally different from that of authoritarianism,^^ One theory they considered was that democracy is different from authoritarianism . ^^ One theory of democracy is that democracy and authoritarianism are at odds .
 Three most war-prone states of the past two centuries were France, Russia, and Britain . This turned out not to be true: democracies fight as many wars as authoritarian states .
 Most constructivist explanations draw heavily on the identity principle to explain international behavior . However, its lessons about the nature of norms, identity, and social interactions can provide powerful insights into the world of IR .
 Realists would quickly answer that North Korea poses a bigger threat, but from a pure military power perspective . Realists say North Korea's threat is based on a purely military power . North Korea is the biggest threat in the world, but not necessarily the most dangerous .
 No one would argue that Great Britain is a threat to the U.S. no matter how many nuclear weapons it builds . Great Britain has a superior military force to North Korea, yet no one would say that . North Korea has no nuclear weapons, but Great Britain does have superior military
 Constructivists reject the realist assumption that states always want more rather than less power and wealth . This is a rejection of the assumption that state interests exist independently of a context of interactions among states . Constructivistists hold that these state identities are complex and changing, .
 Developed states have raced to create science bureaucracies and/or begin technological modernization of their militaries . Eor example, many developing states have begun to create .
 Ironically, many states that build science bureaucracies have few scientists . Many states that have advanced militaries have few enemies . Ironically, states with advanced military might have fewer enemies .
 Research in the constructivist tradition has expanded rapidly in recent years . In each case, however, new ideas and norms, rather than power and self-interest, drive state behavior .
 Constructivist thinking will continue to be at the core of IR research for years to come . It is difficult to tell when a person’s identity is genuine or is adopted for strategic reasons .
 A central idea of postmodernism is that there is no single, objective reality but a multiplicity of experiences and perspectives that defy easy categorization . Postmodernists pay special attention to texts and to discourses —how people talk and write about their subject .
 Marxism is a branch of socialism, a theory that holds that the more powerful classes oppress and exploit the less powerful by denying them their fair share of the surplus they create . Here we will show, briefly, how Marxist theories as social theories contrast with the realist paradigm .
 Marxism includes both communism and other approaches to class struggle . Marxism is a way of looking at the political relationships between richer and poorer people . This process, called class struggle, is one way to look at the world's political relationships .
 Marxists still believe that the surplus created by labor should be recaptured by workers through political struggle . At that time, Industrial Revolution was accompanied by particular hardship among industrial workers in Europe .
 Marxists traditionally consider peasants backward, ignorant, individualistic, and politically passive as compared to the better-educated and classconscious proletariat . One important class in revolutions during the past century (contrary to Marx's expectations) has been peasants .
 Marx’s theories of class struggle were oriented toward domestic society in the industrializing countries of his time, not toward poor countries or international relations . The largest was the Chinese revolution in the 1930s and 1940s, Marx's theories were aimed at domestic society .
 Marxists have mostly (but not exclusively) followed a line of argument developed by V 1 . The answer largely shapes how one sees North-South relations today . Marxists' view of North-south relations is largely shaped by the question .
 Lenin’s theory of imperialism argued that European capitalists were investing in colonies where they could earn big profits and then using part of these profits to buy off the working class at home . Russia was then a relatively backward state, as the global South is today .
 Lenin’s general idea still shapes a major approach to North-South relations . Imperialist expansion could occur only at the expense of other imperialist states, leading to wars such as World War I, he says .
 World accumulation concentrates surplus toward the rich parts of the world and away from the poor ones . The globalizcttion of class relations is the result of global accumulation, the author says .
 After European colonization ended, the U.S. as the world’s richest country (with large investments in the global South and a global military presence) became the target of revolutionaries agitating against exploitation in poor countries . In a number of countries, imperialists were thrown out (
 Mao Zedong’s communists took power in China in 1949 on a Leninist platform adapted to the largely peasant-based movement they led . Mao declared that “China has stood up”—on its own feet, throwing off foreign domination and exploitation .
 Indonesia threw out Dutch, Lebanon threw out Erench, Cuba threw out the Americans . This pattern was repeated, with variations, in dozens of countries . In India at the same time, Gandhi used a different means to achieve similar ends .
 A policy of self-reliance does not foster growth . Trade-offs arise between concentrating or distributing wealth within a single poor country . Eor former colonies .
 In Nicaragua, a former communist leader whom U,S.-organized rebels fought in the 1980s won election as president in 2006 . These events, along with China’s continuing formal adherence to Marxism, suggest that Marxist theories of IR have ongoing importance in the post-Cold War era
 Peace studies seeks peace not in the transactions of state leaders but in the transformation of entire societies and in transnational communities . Peace studies rejects the supposed objectivity of traditional approaches to peace studies .
 The use of conflict resolution has been increasing, becoming more sophisticated, and succeeding more often,""^^ Most conflict resolution uses a third party whose role is mediation between two conflicting parties,"" ^^Mandel, Ernest. "Most of today’s conflict resolution is more sophisticated and
 Some regional conflicts are mediated through regional organizations, single states, or even private individuals . The involvement of the mediator can vary .
 Some mediation is strictly technical - a mediator may take an active but strictly neutral role in channeling communication between two states that lack other channels of communication . For example, Pakistan secretly passed messages between China and the United States before the breakthrough in U,S.-Chinese relations in 1971 .
 Travel and discussion by private individuals and groups can serve as citizen diplomacy . The mediator is like a translator between the two sides, or a therapist helping them work out psychological problems .
 Arbitration often uses a panel of three people, one chosen by each side unilaterally and a third on whom both sides agree . Arbitration is often used to avoid holding up the entire 1995 Dayton Agreement .
 The creation of a world government has long been debated by scholars and pursued by activists . Some scholars believe progress is being made toward the eventual emergence of the world government .
 Peace demonstrators play a role in many conflicts . Peace demonstrators take to the streets in protest against war and militarism . U.S. president GIVE PEACE A CHANCE .
 Feminists agree that the gender makeup of international summits and national governments matters . Feminists from various theoretical traditions agree that gender matters .
 On some core issues, the different strands of feminism have conflicting views, creating interesting debates within feminism . On some issues, feminism has conflicting views on feminism .
 In either case, feminine perspectives create a standpoint from which to observe, analyze, and criticize the traditional perspectives on IR,^^ Another strand, liberal feminism, rejects these claims as being based on stereotyped gender roles .
 Liberal feminists seek to include women more often as subjects of study . They include women state leaders, women soldiers, and other women operating outside gender roles in IR . A third approach combines feminism with postmodernism .
 This view rests on a psychological theory that boys and girls grow up from a young age with different views of separateness and connection . In this theory, because a child’s primary caretaker is almost always female in the early years, girls form their gender identity around the perception of
 Women have formed their own organizations to work for peace on many occasions . Women have been involved in peace movements in the past .
 A gender gap in polls shows that women are about ten percentage points lower than men on average in support for military actions than men . U.S. public opinion on foreign policy issues since the 1930s partially vindicates difference feminists, according to polls .
 In the 1980s, Women’s Action for Nuclear Disarmament opposed the nuclear arms buildup, and women encamped for years at Britain's Greenham Common air base . In recent decades, feminists in recent decades have continued to organize women's peace organizations .
 Investigators found hundreds of cases of sexual crimes by UN personnel in Democratic Congo . In 2004, Secretary-General Annan called ‘shameful’’
 Difference feminists see women as inherently less warlike than men and more adept at making peace because of their potential and actual experiences as mothers . For example, the head of a group of Swedish men sent to build a bridge in Sri Lanka initially said, “Our task is . to build
 Difference feminists developed a feminist practice of international relations that could provide an alternative to the masculine practice of realism . As a result of this gender perspective, the bridge was redesigned to include a pedestrian walkway .
 War does indeed begin in the minds of men, but the foundations for peace would better be sought in women's minds, feminists say . Eor difference feminists, feminists, say war begins in the mind of men but war does not begin with men .
 In 1995, the world’s diplomatic delegations to the UN General Assembly were 80 percent male overall . The heads of those delegations were 97 percent male, the UN said in 1995 .
 In the U.S.SCongress, it is hard to compare men's and women’s voting records on foreign policy issues because there have been so few women in Congress .
 In the 2003 Iraq War, women flew all types of airplanes and helicopters . One woman was in the first group of U.S. POWs captured early in the war .
 Liberal feminists reject such arguments and contend that group bonding in military units does not depend on gender segregation . The effect of war on noncombatant women has also received growing attention .
 Systematic rape was used as a terror tactic in Bosnia and Rwanda, and the Japanese army in World War II operated an international network of sex slaves known as “comfort women . Rape has long been treated as a normal if regrettable byproduct of war, but recently certain instances of
 Gender differences mean that one bell curve is shifted from the other, even though the two may still overlap quite a bit . To take a simple example, a few women are physically larger than almost all men, and a few men are smaller than nearly all women .
 Feminists might call attention to the importance of gender roles such as the need for state leaders to prove their manhood by standing up to the bad guys . In the case of response to aggression, feminists might call .
 This is connected with the male role as protector of the orderly domestic sphere against the dangerous and anarchic outside world . The male role is connected to the role of protecting the domestic sphere from the dangerous outside world, he says .
 Since 2001, gender roles have become increasingly visible on both sides of the “war on terror,” with both women and men’s concepts of masculinity becoming contested territory between the West and Islamic groups .
 Traditional IR that ignore these issues may lack explanatory power as a result . Traditional theories of IR may not have any explanatory power, as well as IR .
 Whether states’ interests reflect fixed assumptions about power and well-being or are constructed by states and substate actors based on ideas and social interactions, those interests do sometimes conflict with those of other states . Whether states' interests are fixed assumptions or constructed by state actors, they conflict with
 Watch the video ""Authors' Chapter Wrap Up"" at MyPoliSciLab . The central claims of realism have been challenged on a variety of grounds .
 Decision making is a steering process in which adjustments are made as a result of feedback from the outside world . States take actions because people in governments —decision makers —choose those actions-^
 A common starting point for studying the decision-making process is the rational model . The rational model is the model of a rational decision making process .
 The rational model of decision making is somewhat complicated by uncertainty and multiple goals of decision makers . For example, the U.S. secretary of state may have a different goal than the secretary of defense .
 The Vietnam War trapped U,S. decision makers in this way in the 1960s . After sending half a million troops halfway around the world, leaders found it difficult to admit to themselves that the costs were greater than the benefits .
 A variation of wishful thinking is to assume that an event with a low probability of occurring will not occur . Decision makers also achieve cognitive balance by overestimate of the probability of a desired outcome, a variation of wishing .
 Cognitive balance often leads decision makers to maintain a hardened image of an enemy . A mirror image refers to two sides in a conflict maintaining very similar enemy images of each other . Decision makers may also experience psychological projection of his or her own feelings onto another actor .
 When a decision maker latches onto an analogy and uses it as a shortcut to a decision, the rational calculation of costs and benefits may be cut short as well . This can be quite useful or quite misleading, depending on whether the analogy is appropriate .
 U,S leaders used the analogy of Munich in 1938 to convince themselves that appeasement in Vietnam War would lead to increased communist aggression in Asia . In retrospect, the differences between North Vietnam and Nazi Germany made this a poor analogy . Vietnam itself became a potent analogy that helped persuade U
 Two modifications to the rational model of decision making have been proposed to accommodate psychological realities . All of these psychological processes interfere with the rational assessment of costs and benefits .
 'Russian Military Interventionism, 1973-1996. Condemned to Repetition/ The Rise, Fall, and Reprise of Soviet' The Rise and Fall of the Soviet'
 IR decision makers often work on the problem until they come up with a “good enough” option that meets some minimal criteria . This is called satisficing, or finding a satisfactory solution .
 Lyndon Johnson had “Tuesday lunches” to discuss national security policy with top national security officials . President Lyndon Johnson held ‘Tuesday lunch’ with top security officials.
 Boris Yeltsin relied on the advice of his bodyguard, who was a trusted friend . Israel’s Golda Meir held many such discussions at her home, sometimes literally in the kitchen .
 The difficulties in reaching rational decisions, both for individuals and for groups, are heightened during a crisis . Crises are foreign policy situations in which outcomes are very important and time frames are compressed .
 In framing options decision makers tend to restrict the choices, again to save time, and tend to overlook creative options . Groupthink occurs easily during crises, especially during crises .
 Kennedy left the room from time to time to encourage free discussion . Even the president’s communication with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was rerouted through his brother Robert .
 A large constituency of ethnic nationals within another country can lobby that country’s government . But whether or not a foreign country has a large constituency, it can lobby the government .
 In democracies, military industries also influence public opinion through advertising that ties their products to patriotic themes . Military industries also give generous campaign contributions to national politicians who vote on military budgets, and sometimes bribes to Pentagon officials .
 Most analysts agree that peace talks can succeed only if the U.S. applies strong leadership to get the two parties to make concessions . Opponents on each side can then blame the United States rather than their own leaders, who thus gain maneuvering room to compromise .
 States use television, newspapers, and other information media in this effort . States use TV, newspaper, radio, radio and other media to make sure they get the message .
 Public opinion polls show that elite opinions sometimes differ considerably from those of the general population . Elite opinions sometimes vary considerably from that of the public, and sometimes from the government .
 In 2006, President Bush’s popularity, which had soared early in the Iraq War, deflated as the war dragged on . President Bush's popularity deflated in 2006 .
 Some democracies, such as the United States, have presidential systems, in which legislative bodies are elected apart from the president . In these systems, legislatures play a direct role in making foreign policy by passing budgets and regulating bureaucratic rules .
 Any agreement they sign must n Q be approved by their domestic legislature . Executives may attend summits and talks, but any agreement signed must be approved . Any agreement signed by foreign governments must also be approved of the agreement .
 Parliament is not required to vote on international agreements negotiated by the prime minister . But it must approve any change to British laws that such agreements entail . Most international agreements involve these types of changes to British law .
 The military might of the Soviet Union, and its control of buffer states in Eastern Europe, seemed defensive in nature to Soviet leaders but appeared aggressive to U.S. leaders . Thus the military might appeared aggressive in the eyes of the United States .
 In practice, most states lie along a spectrum with some mix of democratic and authoritarian elements . Relatively democratic states tend to share values and interests, and hence get along better with each other than with nondemocracies .
 Legislatures should not play a role in deciding whether to use military force . Legislatures are slow to act in times of crisis. Legislatures must act quickly when in crisis, experts say .
 Raiding that is repeated or fuels a cycle of retaliation usually becomes a limited war or what is sometimes called lowantensity conflict . Raids that are repeated are often followed by cycles of retaliation . Raiding is a low-intensity conflict, sometimes called a low intensity conflict .
 Sustaining a civil war usually requires a source of support for rebels . In Chad, for example, a rebel group composed of rival clans to the president’s nearly overthrew the government in 2007 .
 U.S. military forces in South Vietnam fought against Vietcong guerrillas in the 1960s and 1970s, with rising frustration . U,S, military forces fought against the Vietcong in the 60s and 70s with rising frustrations .
 Without a fixed front line, there is much territory that neither side controls . Both sides exert military leverage over the same places at the same time . Efforts to combat a guerrilla army are discussed in Chapter 6 .
 Civilians suffer most when no military force firmly controls a location, opening the door to banditry, personal vendettas, sexual violence, and other such lawless behavior,""^ The situation is doubly painful because conventional armies fighting against guerrillas often cannot distinguish them from
 Warfare increasingly is irregular and guerrilla-style; it is less and less often an open, conventional clash of large state armies . In one famous case in South Vietnam, a U.S. officer who had ordered an entire village burned to deny its use as a sanctuary by the Vietcong
 On individual level of analysis, theories about war center on rationality . Theory about war centers on rationality, rationality .
 An opposite theory holds that conflicts often escalate to war because of deviations from rationality in the individual decision-making processes of national leaders . The opposite theory is that national leaders often make mistakes in their own decisions .
 Political scientists do not agree on a theory of why great wars like World War II occur and cannot predict whether they could happen again . Political scientists say they can't predict whether the next war will be similar .
 Some political scientists study war from a statistical perspective, analyzing data on types of wars and circumstances under which they occurred . Current research focuses on the effects of democracy, government structure, trade, international organizations, and related factors in explaining the escalation or settlement of “militarized interstate
 At the global level of analysis, a number of theories of war have been proposed . The theory of war is one of the most complex theories in the world .
 Advocates of these theories make historical analogies to the decline of the practices of slavery, dueling, and cannibalism . These approaches have a strong empirical basis but no consensus has emerged regarding the best explanation .
 The Netherlands helped establish the principle of self-determination when it broke free of Spanish ownership around 1600 and set up a self-governing Dutch republic . Today such conflicts are widespread—in Northern Ireland, Quebec, Israel-Palestine, India-Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tibet, Sudan
 The United States followed the example of the Netherlands by declaring independence from Britain in 1776 . Latin American states also gained independence early in the 19th century . Germany and Italy unified their nations out of multiple political units later in that century .
 Jews worked persistently in the first half of the 20th century to create the state of Israel . Palestinians aspired in the second half to create a Palestinian state . Nations by the dozens have gained independence and statehood .
 In most cases they aspire to have their own state with its formal international status and territorial boundaries . In most such cases they aim to have an international status . In some cases they want to have a state with formal international borders .
 It's unclear why people identify most strongly at one level of group identity, ° In Somalia, loyalties are to clans; in Serbia, they are to the ethnic group . In the United States and elsewhere, multiethnic nations command people’s primary loyalty .
 Perhaps someday people will shift loyalties even further, developing a gloM identity as humans first and members of states and ethnic groups second .
 In 1994, in Rwanda, a Hutu-nationalist government carried out the most deadly genocide of recent decades . The pledges of world leaders after that experience to “never again” allow genocide have been found wanting .
 The international community’s ineffective response to the mass murders in Darfur, like that in Rwanda in 1994, shows the limited 'ZD reach of international norms in today’�s state-based international system . The international response to Darfur's mass murders has been ineffective
 The breakup of these states allowed ethnic and regional conflicts to take center stage, sometimes bringing violence and war . The breakup has led to ethnic, regional conflicts and sometimes violence .
 These cases may indicate a dilemma in that freedom comes at the expense of order and vice versa, says CNN's John Sutter .
 Most people in Azerbaijan are Muslims; most Armenians are Christians . This is a very common pattern in ethnic conflicts . For instance, most people in Azerbaijev are Muslims .
 Religious differences hold the potential to make existing conflicts more intractable, because religions involve core values, which are held o 1 as absolute truth . This is increasingly true as fundamentalist movements have gained strength in recent decades .
 Samuel Huntington, Samuel P. Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order . Huntington: Clash of the Civilizations is the reopening of the world's new world .
 Musiims think non-Musiims are: Fanaticai Jordan Turkey Turkey Egypt Indonesia Pakistan Pakistan Not respectfui of women .
 Al Qaeda recruits fighters from various countries, encourages and sometimes trains them, and helps them fight in foreign conflicts . Al Qaeda is more a network or movement than a central organization in recent years, says Lawrence Wright .
 Islamists swept aside ethnic rebels and took power for themselves, but by 2013 were ousted by a military intervention by Erance and neighboring African countries to return control to the government .
 In Angola in the 1980s, the U.S. backed a rebel army called UNITA against a Soviet-aligned government . In truth, the ideological differences were quite arbitrary .
 The rebels who used democratic rhetoric to get U.S. support had earlier received Chinese support and mouthed Maoist rhetoric . The rebels had earlier used democratic language to get support .
 Border disputes tend to be among the most intractable in IR . States seldom yield territory in exchange for money or any other positive reward .
 The goal of regaining territory lost to another state is called irredentism . For example, in 2002, Bolivian public opinion opposed a gas export pipeline through Chile to the sea because Chile had seized the coastline from Bolivia in 1879 .
 This form of nationalism often leads directly to serious interstate conflicts . Because of their association with the integrity of states, territories are valued far beyond economic value they hold .
 Ethnic groups had intermingled and intermarried, leaving mixed populations in most of the Yugoslav republics . When Yugoslavia broke up in 1991-1992, several republics declared their independence as separate states .
 Serbia seized effective control of significant areas of Croatia and Bosnia that contained Serbian communities or linked such populations geographically . NonSerbian populations in these areas were driven out or massacred . Then, when Croatia reconquered most of its territory in 1995, Serbian populations fled .
 Ethnic nationalism proved stronger than multiethnic tolerance in both Serbia and Croatia . Serbia split peacefully from Montenegro in 2006, Czechoslovakia split into Czech Republic and Slovakia in a cooperative manner .
 The breakup of the Soviet Union did not lead to violent territorial disputes between republics in most cases, even when ethnic groups spanned new international borders . The norm against forceful redrawing of borders does not apply to cases of decolonization .
 The transfer of Hong Kong from British to Chinese control in 1997 illustrates how colonial territory is dispensable while home territory is nearly sacred (China’s perspective)
 In 2005, Aceh separatists in Aceh province, Indonesia, disbanded, giving up on independence and instead participating in regional elections in 2006 . The Indonesian government withdrew its 24,000 troops from Aceh and offered the province limited self-rule along with 70 percent of the oil, gas
 The West Bank near Jordan, the Gaza Strip near Egypt, and the Golan Heights of Syria are central to the Arab-Israeli conflict . Israel returned the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt, but the remaining territories occupied in 1967 remain central to Israel's conflict .
 CIA’s World Factbook provides a comprehensive list of minor border and other international disputes . Israeli-Palestinian agreements since 1993 tried to move toward Palestinian autonomy . Israel's ongoing construction of Jewish settlements in the West Bank remains a contentious sticking point .
 The tiny Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, whose surrounding waters may hold substantial oil reserves, are claimed in part or in full by China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei .
 In 2012, China and the Philippines had a months-long standoff at a tiny shoal, but ended it peacefully . In 2012 China and Philippines had months long standoff at tiny Shoal .
 Libya claims ownership of the entire Gulf of Sidra, treating it as a bay . The United States says most of it is international waters . Eor example, Libya says it is a bay; the United States does not .
 The theory has been used to help explain both World War I and the expansion of Japan prior to World War II . Another kind of economic conflict that affects international security concerns military industry .
 Drug trafficking is treated as a security threat because of its effect on national morale and efficiency . Unlike other smuggling operations, drug trafficking supplies illegal products that are treated as security threats . Drug trafficking has been a major problem in the U.S. for years .
 A New Cold War Will Emerge Between the U.S. and Russia, Russia and Russia have major differences in key policy areas . Russia and the United States are divided on key policy issues .
 The U.S. spends about $30 billion a year on foreign aid but about $700 billion on military forces and war . States believe they must devote large resources to military capabilities if other states are doing so .
 States also use military forces for humanitarian purposes . They may also hope to compel other states to behave in certain ways, by threatening an attack if the state does not comply .
 MyPoliSciLab provides assistance after disasters, for peacekeeping, for surveillance of drug trafficking, and for repression of domestic political dissent, among other missions .
 Author's estimates based on data provided by the following sources: 2011 data from Stockholm International Peace Research Institute .
 While battling armed factions of an insurgency, a government must essentially conduct a public relations campaign to persuade the population to abandon the movement . A government must be strong militarily, but cannot be too brutal in the application of force, lest more of the population begin to support the guerrillas
 The U.S. Army’s counterinsurgency manual suggests deploying 20 troops for every 1,000 citizens to be protected from insurgents .
 U.S. never reached such a ratio of troops-to-population ratio in Iraq or Afghanistan . Such a ratio would require 600,000 troops for Afghanistan, compared with 130,000 international troops .
 Controlling the seas in wartime allows states to move their own goods and military forces by sea while preventing enemies from doing so . Navies are adapted to control passage through the seas and to attack land near coastlines .
 U.S. Special Forces killed hijackers of one American ship in 2009, European Union attack helicopters raided an onshore pirate base in 2012, and Somali rescue freed a ship in late 2012 .
 A notorious pirate leader, “Big Mouth,” who had once seized the Ukrainian ship full of tanks, announced his disarmament and retirement in 2013 . Aircraft carriers are instruments of power projection that can attack virtually any state in the world .
 Merely sending an aircraft carrier sailing to the vicinity of an international conflict implies a threat to use force . Aircraft carriers are extremely expensive and require 20 to 25 supporting ships for protection and supply .
 Only the U.S. operates large carriers, known as supercarriers, costing more than $5 billion each . Only the United States operates such large carriers .
 China has acquired and renovated one carrier, which it uses for training . In 2015, the U.S. Navy plans to launch a newly designed supercarrier, costing $14 billion .
 The 2001 terrorist attacks showed a weakness in U,S, “human intelligence” capabilities, in that the U.S. had not penetrated a large terrorist network based in Afghanistan and operating globally . The 2001 attacks showed that the United States, ‘signal intelligence’
 The largest U.S. military intelligence agency is the National Security Agency . Its mission is encoding U,S. communications and breaking the codes of foreign communications .
 The budgets of U.S. intelligence agencies, although officially secret, were revealed in 2005 to be around $44 billion a year . Altogether, U,S. budgets of intelligence agencies are estimated to be $44billion a year.
 The resort to force in international conflicts now has more profound costs and consequences . Great powers can no longer use force to settle disputes among themselves without risking massive destruction and economic ruin. Great powers in particular can't use force against each other .
 In addition to America’s 7,000 drones in 2011, other countries have been rapidly acquiring them, including Russia, India, Pakistan, and Iran also have drones .
 U.S. underwater sea drones for mine clearing, produced by Germany, were sent to the Persian Gulf in 2012 as tensions with Iran escalated .
 Gyberattacks are an issue of growing importance in international relations, with Ghinese, Russian, and American hackers constantly probing each other’s systems . In the future, terrorist attacks also could target computer networks, including the Internet and critical infrastructure .
 In 2010, the U,S.-Israeli Stuxnet virus targeted Iran’s nuclear centrifuges, and in 2012, the Flame virus was found on thousands of computers across the Middle East, mostly in Iran . A few months later, probably in response, a virus deleted
 Military historians refer to a period of rapid change in the conduct of war as a “revolution in military affairs” These periods combine innovative applications of new technology with changes in military doctrine, organization, or operations .
 Many military analysts consider the present period, starting with the 1991 Gulf War, a revolution in military affairs, especially in U.S. forces . The present period is considered a revolution by military analysts . The Gulf War was a major turning point in the military's military affairs .
 Two centuries ago, the German military strategist Garl von Glausewitz described as a ‘fog of war” The confusion and uncertainty that greatly reduces the effectiveness of armies in battle .
 Today’s U.S. forces are piercing that fog for themselves while thickening it for their enemies . The fog is thickening for the enemy, but also for the enemies .
 The ability to conduct precision strikes, and the increasing use of space in warfare, are two other aspects of the present revolution . Precision strikes and the ability to use space are also key features of the revolution .
 Some are motivated by religion but others by class ideology (for example). Others motivated by ideology (or class ideology) Some of the protesters were motivated by religious beliefs .
 More than guerrilla warfare, terrorism is a shadowy world of faceless enemies and irregular tics marked by extreme brutality . Terrorists in the U.S. face a shadowy, faceless world, and irregular enemies . The world of terrorism is marked with extreme brutality, says CNN.com
 By capturing media attention worldwide with dramatic incidents of violence, radicals hoped to make Palestinian aspirations an issue that Western governments could not ignore when deciding on policies toward the Middle East . Yet, the persistence of terrorism is in some ways puzzling because the tactic has a mixed record .
 Suicide bombers were arguably effective at convincing the United States to leave Lebanon in 1983 . Chechen terrorists’ 2004 school attack marked their end as a serious force in Chechnya . Palestinians did not win a state through terrorism, A1 Qaeda affiliates in Iraq so alienated the Sunni tribes that
 Even large numbers of suicide bombers have yet to be effective at gaining a state for the Tamils or providing leverage for Hamas or Islamic Jihad against Israel . Clearly, terrorist activities do not reliably achieve political ends .
 Suicide bombings most frequently occur against democracies rather than autocracies . This is because democracies are thought to be strongly influenced by public opinion . According to one study, suicide bombings are more likely to follow strategic patterns .
 Terrorists are more willing than states are to violate the norms of the international system because, unlike states, they do not have a stake in that system . Still, this same study concludes that this terror tactic has not been particularly successful at achieving significant goals, this study concludes .
 Scholars tend to avoid the label “terrorism” for such acts, preferring to call it repression or war . This was true of the Palestine Liberation Organization during the peace process in 1993-2000 as well as the Irish Republican Army starting in 1995 . States themselves carry out acts designed to
 In today’s world of undeclared war, guerrilla war, and ethnic violence, a large gray zone surrounds clear cases of terrorism . Disagreements about whether terrorism included Palestinian attacks include Palestinian attacks .
 The U,S. and British governments identified the Libyan intelligence agents responsible . In 1992, backed by the UN Security Council, they demanded that Libya turn over the agents for trial .
 Libya turned over the suspects for trial in 1999, two received life in prison while a third was acquitted . When Libya refused, the UN imposed sanctions including a ban on international flights to or from Libya . In 1999, Libya turned the suspects over and the UN suspended its sanctions .
 When deployed on ballistic missiles, they can potentially be fired from the home territory of one state and wreak great destruction on another state, ^' Until now this has never happened .
 Nuclear weapons are, in sheer power, the world’s most destructive weapons, A single weapon the size of a refrigerator can destroy a city . A single nuclear bomb the same size can destroy an entire city .
 Fission weapons are simpler and less expensive than fusion weapons . When a fission weapon explodes, one type of atom is split, or fissioned, into new types with less total mass . Fission bombs are also known as thermonuclear bombs or hydrogen bombs .
 Fission weapons were invented 60 years ago by U.S. scientists in a secret World War II science program known as the Manhattan Project . The Manhattan Project was part of a secret WWII science program .
 Strategic weapons could hit an enemy’s homeland, usually at long range . Tactical nuclear weapons were designed for battlefield use . Tactical weapons could be used to hit a target's homeland .
 Ballistic missiles carry a warhead up along a trajectory and let it drop on the target . A trajectory typically rises out of the atmosphere—at least 50 miles high, before descending .
 The modified Scud missiles fired by Iraq at Saudi Arabia and Israel during the Gulf War were SRBMs . In regional conflicts, the long range of more powerful missiles may not be necessary .
 Shortand mediumrange missiles apparently being developed by Iran, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, India, North Korea, and possibly Argentina and Brazil . In 2009, Iran alarmed the West by testing a missile that could reach Egypt, Israel and parts of Europe .
 Since 2001, the U.S. has run a container security initiative aimed at preventing weapons of mass destruction from reaching U,S. shores in seaborne shipping containers . But doing so without impeding the prosperity-inducing flow of international trade is a daunting challenge . Nearly 8 million
 It is possible to defend against most chemical weapons by dressing troops in protective clothing and gas masks . But protective suits are hot, and antichemical measures reduce the efficiency of armies .
 Civilians less likely to have protection against chemicals than military forces . Civilians are less likely likely to be protected from chemicals than soldiers .
 Use of chemical weapons in war has been rare. Several times, chemical weapons have been deliberately used against civilians (notably by the Iraqi government against Iraqi Kurds in the 1980s).
 Iraq's actions breached a psychological barrier against using chemical weapons . Iraq’s actions showed such weapons to be cheap and effective against human waves of attackers without protective gear . Only Iraq has violated the treaty—against Iran in the 1980s,
 Chemical weapons are a cheap way for states to gain weapons of mass destruction . This example stimulated dozens more poor states to begin acquiring chemical weapons . Chemical weapons can be a cheap and easy way to gain mass destruction, writes CNN.com .
 Researchers try to ascertain the military '1 '1' implications of advances in biotechnology .
 Lax security at the vast, far-flung former Soviet nuclear complex increased fears that fissionable 9 ^ materials could reach terrorists . The former Soviet-era nuclear complex is located in Russia's most populous region .
 The relevant regional conflicts are those between Israel and the Arab states, Iran and its Arab neighbors . India and Pakistan each have dozens of nuclear weapons and the missiles to deliver them . The two Koreas and possibly Taiwan and China also have nuclear weapons .
 In the 1990s, Pakistan’s top nuclear scientist sold bomb kits with lowgrade uranium, enrichment centrifuguges, and bomb designs to Libya, Iran, and North Korea . Libya gave its up .
 The Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968 created a framework for controlling the spread of nuclear materials and expertise . The International Atomic Energy Agency is charged with inspecting the nuclear power industry in member states .
 Under the terms of the Gulf War cease-fire, Iraq’s nuclear program was uncovered and dismantled by the IAEA . In 2006, a deal between the U.S. and India to share nuclear technology led many states to question the NPT .
 North Korea withdrew from the IAEA in 1993, then bargained with Western leaders to get economic assistance, including safer reactors, in exchange for freezing its nuclear program . The deal received final U.S. and Indian approval in 2008, but it received final approval in the U.
 After the creation of nuclear weapons in World War II, the two superpowers built large arsenals of them during the decades of the Cold War . Each side had tens of thousands of nuclear arsenals .
 Eor decades the effort merely channeled and illuminated the steady buildup of arms on both sides . The effort merely . channeled . and illuminated . the steady build-up of arms .
 If India could not assuredly destroy Pakistan’s missile, it would undoubtedly deploy its own nuclear missile to deter Pakistan from using its missile . India, too, could achieve a secondstrike capability, too .
 The program is called the Strategic Defense Initiative , “Star Wars,” or Ballistic Missile Defense . It originated in President Ronald Reagan’s 1983 call for a comprehensive shield that would make nuclear missiles obsolete . However, the mission soon shifted to defending some U,S, missiles
 The nuclear arms race between the superpowers during the Cold War led to strategies and arms control agreements that helped develop norms and expectations about nuclear weapons and missiles . The Cold War was a Cold War era that led to the development of norms and standards for nuclear weapons .
 It had begun testing an airplane-based laser system and concluded agreements with Poland and the Czech Republic to build missile defenses in those countries . It had concluded agreements to build a sea-based system to guard against any Iranian threat, with Turkey .
 The treaty does not take effect until signed and ratified by all 44 states believed to be capable of building a crude nuclear weapon . India did not sign the CTBT and defied it in 1998 with five nuclear tests . Pakistan followed suit with its own tests, followed suit by India .
 The U.S. Senate voted in 1999 against ratifying the CTBT, Russia ratified it in 2000 . North Korea’s nuclear tests in 2006 and 2009 dealt more setbacks to the treaty . All weapons of mass destruction are relatively difficult and expensive to build .
 People once believed in the U.S. that “war is good for the economy” because, seemingly, military spending had helped end the Great Depression in the late 1930s . If this were true, state leaders would not face difficult choices in setting military budgets . State leaders
 Revolutionary Thomas Paine warned in 1787 that “war has but one thing certain, and that is to increase taxes,” ' ^Taine, Thomas. U.S.
 World military spending is a vast flow of money that could, if redirected to other purposes, change the world profoundly . Most is spent by a few big states, nearly half by the United States alone . U.S. spending is expected to fall steadily in the coming years as its wars
 In the global South, military spending varies greatly across countries, depending on the government in power . The spending also depends heavily on available hard currency, from exports of oil or other products .
 Most arms sales worldwide go to the global South . Most arms imports have been in the Middle East, but lately India and China have taken a growing share . About half of these arms imports are in Middle East .
 Global arms sales fell, but have since climbed back to near-Cold War levels, say activists .
 In the fall of 2009, the UN General Assembly voted nearly unanimously to begin work on an Arms Trade Treaty . The treaty passed the General Assembly in 2013 with only Iran, North Korea, and Syria voting no . Iran and North Korea voted no .
 "Ratification by the U,S. Senate appears unlikely,""^^ ^®Liberman, Peter. Libertyman . Libertyman: Ratification is unlikely .
 Many states adhere to a principle of civilian supremacy . Many states, especially democratic states, adhere to this principle . Many of the world's most populous countries adhere to the principle .
 Turkey’s military has intervened numerous times to take control from elected leaders when military officers felt the government was threatening the secular nature of Turkey . Recently, the civilian government has been aggressive at arresting officers who they believe were plotting a coup .
 If tensions become too sharp between civilian leadership and military forces, a coup d’etat can result . A coup is the seizure of political power by domestic military forces .
 CIA covert operations in the 1950s overthrew unfriendly foreign governments . Several thousand such operations were mounted during the Cold War, when the CIA and its Soviet counterpart, the KGB, waged an ongoing secret war .
 The CIA-organized Bay of Pigs invasion in Cuba, in 1961, was its first big failure, followed by other failed efforts against the Castro government . CIA covert activities were sharply scaled back after congressional hearings in the 1970s .
 North Korea uses its nuclear weapons development program as leverage to get U.S., Japanese, and South Korean aid . North Korea's nuclear weapons program is used to get aid from the West, South Korea and the South .
 The day-to-day cooperative activities of international actors often are less newsworthy than their conflicts . Rather, states work with other states for mutual gain and take advantage of each other only “at the margin,” states say .
 The rules that govern most interactions in IR are rooted in norms . Great gains can be realized by regulating international interactions through institutions and rules .
 At the turn of the 19th century, U.S. war planners had active war plans for the possibility of a major naval conflict between the United States and Great Britain . Today, such plans would seem ridiculous .
 International norms are evolving in such areas as humanitarian intervention and human rights . Tir Tir* International norms have evolved in the past . Tir* Tir*
 The functional roles of lOs are important to their overall effect on international relations, but those roles are taken up in Chapter 10 on international integration .
 The International Political Science Association is a forum for political scientists from around the world . Political scientists from other countries can join the association to meet each other .
 Amnesty International for human rights and Planned Parenthood for reproductive rights and family planning . Planned Parenthood is a leading reproductive rights advocate .
 The UN does not exist because it has power to force its will on the world’s states, it exists because states have created it to serve their needs . A state's membership in the UN is essentially a form of indirect leverage, a UN membership is essentially an indirect leverage .
 The UN is a symbol of international order and even of global identity . States get several benefits from the UN, such as international stability . This allows states to realize gains from trade .
 The UN also promotes and coordinates development assistance and other programs of economic and social development in the global South . These programs reflect the belief that poverty is an important source of international conflict and war, UN says .
 Inadequate funding and management problems undermined peacekeeping efforts in the former Yugoslavia in 1993-1995 . In response to these problems, the UN scaled back peacekeeping operations in 1995-1997 and carried out reductions and reforms .
 This U.S. free riding shows that support of intergovernmental organizations presents a difficult collective goods problem . Finally, after criticism from allies, the United States agreed to pay up, but under renegotiated terms .
 The 2003 Iraq War triggered serious divisions among the great powers that sidelined the UN . After reaching consensus to insist on Iraqi disarmament and send back UN inspectors, the Security Council split on whether to authorize force .
 When France threatened to veto a UN resolution authorizing war, a U,S.-British coalition toppled the Iraqi government without explicit UN backing, UN secretary-general Kofi Annan later called the war “illegal” The UN sent a team to Iraq to help with reconstruction, but
 The UN is in some ways just beginning to work as it was originally intended to, through the concert of great powers and universal recognition of the Charter . However, as states turned increasingly to the UN after the Cold War, its modest size and resources became seriously overburdened .
 The Security Council is responsible for maintaining international peace and security . The Council is also responsible for restoring peace when it breaks down .
 The three European seats could be combined into one but this would water down the power of Britain and Erance, which can veto any such change . Japan’s bid for a seat faces Chinese opposition .
 Possible new permanent members could include Germany, Japan, India, Brazil, Egypt, and either Nigeria or South Africa . None of these plans has made much progress .
 Any overhaul of the Security Council would require a change in the UN Charter . Change in membership would reduce the power of the current five permanent members, any of which could veto the East Timor veto .
 As was learned in Bosnia, however, such neutral forces do not succeed well in a situation in which the Security Council has identified one side as the aggressor . The Security Council will meet in a meeting in Washington on Thursday .
 A decade after the main war ended, such attacks proved vexing for UN forces . In 2012, these UN peacekeepers proved weak when a rebel movement in the unstable east of the country went on the attack, killing civilians .
 The secretary-general has called for thousands of additional troops for Democratic Congo . In 2007, the Security Council approved a nearly 20,000-troop peacekeeping force for the Darfur region in Sudan, after several years of resistance from the Sudanese government .
 In the 1990s, the UN had several spectacular failures in peacekeeping, in the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda, Angola, and Somalia . Less newsworthy were the successful missions in that period .
 Lessons learned in Cambodia helped the UN accomplish a similar mission in Mozambique . A peace agreement ended a long and devastating civil war there, setting up mechanisms for disarmament and the integration of military forces .
 Problems with sex-related crimes in UN peacekeeping operations and the importance of women in postwar societies spurred the Security Council to pass Resolution 1325 in 2000 to focus attention on gender issues in peacekeeping .
 These operations include not only traditional peacekeeping but also the use of force to protect civilians (as in Democratic Congo), the supervision of elections , and even running the government while a society gets back on its feet . These expanded operations after conflicts are called peacebuilding .
 In an effort to provide longer-term support after wars, in 2005 the UN created a Peacebuilding Commission to coordinate reconstruction, institution building, and economic recovery efforts .
 Observers are unarmed military officers sent to a conflict area in small numbers simply to watch what happens and report back to the UN . With the UN watching, the parties to a war are often less likely to break a cease-fire . With a peace agreement, parties are less likely
 UN peacekeepers can interpose themselves physically between warring parties to keep them apart . They often try to negotiate with military officers on both sides of the conflict .
 Peacekeeping is much more difficult if one side sees UN forces as being biased toward the other side . Israel feels this way about UN forces in southern Lebanon, for example . Peacekeeping will be difficult if Israel sees this way, says Israel .
 In 2010, the five leading contributors are Bangladesh, Pakistan, India, Nigeria, Nigeria and Nepal . Reasons for troop contributions to UN peacekeeping vary .
 Some states find contributing to these missions financially beneficial, since peacekeeping forces are paid by UN contributions . In a few countries such as Nepal and Sierra Leone, sending military forces out of the country for peacekeeping is useful for domestic political stability after a civil war .
 The Economic and Social Council has 54 member states elected by the General Assembly for three-year terms . ECOSOC manages the overlapping work of a large number of programs and agencies . The Assembly coordinates UN programs and agency through the Council .
 UNICEF is the UN Children’s Eund, which gives technical and financial assistance to poor countries for programs benefiting children . The UN Children's Eund is based in the United States .
 UNICEE is keeping busy with the needs of children in many countries . Unfortunately, the needs for children are still urgent in many of the world's most populous countries .
 UNICEE has for decades organized U.S. children in an annual Halloween fund drive on behalf of their counterparts in poorer countries . Einanced by voluntary contributions, the fund drive is organized by children in the United States . UNICEEE has organized the annual fund drive for the
 In 2006, the UN created a new Human Rights Council, replacing a Human Rights Commission notorious for including human rights abusers as member states .
 The longest-established lOs, with some of the most successful records, are specialized agencies dealing with technical aspects of international coordination such as aviation and postal exchange . The longest established lOs are specialized agency dealing with aviation, postal exchange and aviation .
 International Telecommunications Union allocates radio frequencies . Eor instance, the ITSU allocates frequencies .
 The World Meteorological Organization oversees a world weather watch and promotes the exchange of weather information . E.E. O.O. oversees the World Weather Watch .
 This is very costly in today’s world, in which economic welhbeing everywhere depends on trade and economic exchange in world markets . This is a costly mistake in today's world, which is dependent on trade, trade .
 A flagrant violation of the sanctity of embassies occurred in Iran after Islamic revolutionaries took power in 1979 . Iranian students seized and occupied the US, embassy compound, holding US, diplomats hostage .
 The Iranian government did not directly commit this act but did condone it and did refuse to force students out of the embassy . Diplomats enjoy diplomatic immunity even when they leave the embassy grounds .
 U.S. commitments as host country to UN include extending diplomatic immunity to diplomats accredited to the UN . Given this immunity, delegates simply tear up thousands of parking tickets each year, for example .
 Diplomatic norms call for politeness when expelling spies . The standard reason given is “for activities not consistent with his or her diplomatic status” If a spy operates under cover of being a businessperson or tourist, then no immunity applies .
 In practice, these interests sections are located in the former U,S, and Cuban embassies . For instance, U.S. interests are represented by the Swiss embassy in Cuba, while Cuban interests are .
 The law of diplomacy is repeatedly violated in one context, terrorism . Terrorist groups do not enjoy the benefits of diplomatic law . Terrorists are willing to break diplomatic norms and laws .
 In late 2004, terrorists stormed a U,S. consulate in Saudi Arabia, killing several guards . In 2012, they burned the U.S., consulate in Benghazi, Libya, killing the ambassador . The U.,S. ambassador was killed in 2012 .
 Just war doctrine has become a strong international norm, not one that all states follow but an important part of the modern intellectual tradition governing matters of war and peace that evolved in Europe, Walzer says .
 A state may not take advantage of another’s aggression to wage a war that is essentially aggressive . The intent must be just, a state must not be taken advantage of the aggression of another, a court says .
 Critics found the justness of the war to be compromised by the U.S. interest in obtaining cheap oil from the Middle East . The U,S. war effort to oust Iraq from Kuwait in 1991 was certainly a response to aggression, but critics found it compromised .
 Just war doctrine has been undermined, even more seriously than have laws of war crimes, by the changing nature of warfare . In civil wars and low-intensity conflicts, the belligerents range from poorly organized militias to national armies .
 One of the newest areas of international law concerns human rights . The rights of human n -I beings against certain abuses of their own governments,^ ^*^
 These two covenants, along with the UDHR, are often referred to as the International Bill of Human Rights . The UDHR and the U.S. Human Rights Act are often called the International Human Rights Covenants .
 Several regional lOs have promoted the protection of human rights . Besides the UN-related human rights treaties, several lOs promote human rights protection .
 The Inter-American Court of Human Rights has had some success in promoting human rights in Latin America . But it has also been limited by state refusal to abide by its decisions . The European Union, Council of Europe, and European Court of Rights all work to ensure that human rights are respected
 Free trade agreements frequently contain provisions that condition trade benefits on respect for human rights, especially workers’ rights . Because these treaties provide policies beneficial to the developing states, they create a ready mechanism to punish countries who abuse their citizens .
 Today, NGOs play a key role in efforts to win basic political rights in authoritarian countries . The leading organization pressing this struggle is Amnesty International . Amnesty International has a reputation for impartiality .
 Several practices draw criticism . These include imprisoning political opponents of the government, use of prison labor, and the use of a criminal justice system .
 Amnesty International: China executes more people than the rest of the world combined . China executes thousands each year, sometimes within days of the crime and sometimes for relatively minor crimes .
 John H.H.Hkenberry, G. John. Hkenberry: "We review key world economic arrangements. But first, we review key economic arrangements"
 U.S. sanctions on Iran, a major oil exporter, invited European companies to fill the void in recent years . For example, U,S. Sanctions on Iran invited European firms to fill void .
 Prices reflect expectations about supply and demand in the near future . Supply and demand system does not always produce stability, however . At this price, sellers are willing to supply the same number of units that buyers want .
 The amount of economic activity may vary by only 5 or 10 percent, but the price of oil doubles or triples, then drops in half . These recessions in turn reduce demand, and oil prices drop,^ The amount in economic activity varies by only .
 The terms of exchange shape the relative rates at which states accumulate power and thus shape the way power distributions in the international system change over time . Because power is relative, trade is desirable only when the distribution of benefits favors one’s own state .
 Mercantilism declined in the 19th century as Britain decided it had more to gain from free trade than from protectionism . At that time it meant the creation of a trade surplus in order to stockpile money in the form of precious metal .
 North Korea maintained a policy of self-reliance and isolation even after the Cold War . North Korea experienced mass starvation in the 1990s .
 In a number of poor states, the textile trade has been a favored infant industry that governments have protected . Protection of infant industry is considered a relatively legitimate reason for protectionism .
 When gas prices jumped in the 1970s, U.S. auto producers were slow to shift to smaller cars . Smaller Japanese cars gained a great advantage in the U,S. market . The Japanese cars are still popular in Japan .
 The U,S. government used a variety of measures, including import quotas and loan guarantees, to help the U.S. industry through this transition . Government also protects industries considered vital to national security .
 In the 1980s, U.S. officials sought to protect the electronics and computer industries against being driven out of business by Japanese competitors . Those industries were considered crucial to military production .
 Predatory generally refers to efforts to unfairly capture a large share of world markets, or even a near-monopoly, so that eventually the predator can raise prices without fearing competition . Predatory is a term used to describe efforts to try and unfairly capture the world markets .
 Dumping complaints are usually lodged by particular industries that feel they have been harmed by foreign competitors . These conflicts now generally are resolved through the WTO .
 International norms favor tariffs as the preferred method of protection because they are straightforward and not hidden . Most states maintain a long and complex schedule of tariffs based on thousands of categories .
 The U.S. government used quotas to restrict the number of Japanese-made cars that could enter the United States in the 1980s . The U,S. automobile industry was losing ground rapidly to Japanese imports .
 In marketing U.S. products in Japan, manufacturers complain of complex bureaucratic regulations . A tight system of corporate alliances funnels the supply of parts from Japanese suppliers to Japanese manufacturers .
 When a state nationalizes an entire industry, such as oil production or banking, foreign competition is shut out . This has caused great controversy in the WTO , such as when Europe banned genetically modified crops .
 U.S. citizens sometimes ignore advice of liberal economists to buy the best products at the best price . Citizens may follow a philosophy of economic nationalism —use of economics to influence international power and relative standing .
 Although such a bias reduces the overall efficiency of world production, it does benefit U,S. workers . The U.S. is the most successful economy in the world .
 Harley-Davidson lost half its U.S. market share in just four years . U.K. government imposed tariffs on imported Japanese motorcycles in response to the loss of half its market share .
 In the late 1980s, Harley expanded its market share and began exporting to Japan . Protectionism worked in this case because it was short term and straightforward . Harley expanded market share in the late 80s .
 The Uruguay Round started in 1986 . A successful conclusion to the round would add more than $100 billion to the world economy annually .
 The GATT encouraged states to use import tariffs rather than nontariff barriers to protect industries, and to lower those tariffs over time . Erance held out adamantly and won the right to protect its film industry against U.S. films, Erom 1947 .
 Agricultural trade is politically more sensitive than trade in manufactured goods . Trade in services such as banking and insurance is another current major focus of the WTO . Such trade exceeded onefifth of the total value of world trade in 2012, Trade in telecommunications is a related area of interest .
 Trade ministers meeting in Doha, Qatar, agreed to launch a new round of trade negotiations, the Doha Round, in 2001 . The issues under negotiation are under negotiation .
 The Doha Round of WTO negotiations stretched from 2001 to 2013 without conclusion . Participants tried to use a key deadline, the expiration of the U.S. Congress’s fast-track authorization, after which approval of a new WTO agreement would become difficult .
 Some leaders suggested wrapping up the Doha Round over that weekend, before the change in U.S. administrations, before a change in administrations .
 A sweeping agreement, such as that between Canada and India in 2007, generally contains mind-numbing levels of detail concerning specific industries and products . For instance, one country may reduce its prohibition on imports of product X (which the second country exports at competitive prices) while the other country
 A new WTO agreement is a collective good because all the member states profit from relaxing trade restrictions regardless of which of them made the concessions needed to reach a deal .
 The deal was held up while France and the U.S. fought about French restrictions on U,S. films . For example, in the previous Uruguay Round, the deal was delayed .
 When WTO negotiations bog down, bilateral agreements can keep trade momentum going . They have advantages of reducing the collective goods problem inherent in muh 1 tilateral negotiations and facilitating reciprocity .
 Initially, Mexico’s currency dropped drastically relative to the dollar in 1994-1995 . Opponents of NAFTA criticized the low wages and poor labor laws in Mexico, which they feared would drag down U,S. labor standards .
 Over 15 years, neither the great benefits predicted by NAFTA supporters nor the disasters predicted by opponents materialized . Environmentalists criticized Mexico’s lax environmental laws (relative to those of the United States) and saw NAFTA as giving U,S, corporations license to pollute by moving south
 President Clinton asked Congress in 1997 to reinstate fast-track legislation . President Clinton has asked Congress to re-open the debate .
 The 2001 recession and post-September 11 security measures reduced trade . China provided U.S. companies with a better source of cheap labor . Left-leaning governments, wary of liberal advice, came to power in most of Latin American countries .
 Those countries cared most about tariff-free trade, while the U.S. emphasized a range of other issues such as services, intellectual property, and financial openness .
 Currently, the FTAA talks remain in hibernation, and the weight of trade negotiations fall to the Doha Round . Meanwhile, however, the United States reached free trade agreements with several Latin American countries .
 OPEC may work as well as it does only because one member, Saudi Arabia, has enough oil to unilaterally manipulate supply enough to drive prices up or down . The collective good breaks down when too many members exceed their quotas, as has happened repeatedly to OPEC . Then world oil prices drop,
 Data adapted from www.c om/News Feature/2010/ope c/p rod .
 OPEC, the major oihimporting states formed their own organization, the International Energy Agency . The IEA partly functions as a cartel, but it is not a cartel .
 The lEA coordinates the energy policies of major industrialized states in order to keep world oil prices low and stable . It also maintains oil stockpiles in case of a shortage on world markets .
 Oil prices fluctuated from about $20 per barrel in 1998 to over $140 and back to $40 in 2008 . This shows the limits of cartels in affecting prices, Eor a few commodities that are subject to large price fluctuations on world markets .
 NGOs introduced Eair Trade Certified coffee, and later chocolate and other products, guaranteeing farmers a price above their production costs through the price booms and busts . Such cartels exist for coffee, several minerals and some other products .
 Industries and other domestic political actors often seek to influence a state’s foreign economic policies . These pressures do not always favor protectionism .
 Despite competition among companies and between management and labor, all share common interests regarding trade policies . Eor instance, some U.S. industries supported the North American Eree Trade Agreement . Others opposed it .
 Companies trying to protect intellectual property in an international context cannot rely on the same enforcement of rules as in domestic contexts . For several years these disputes slowed the effective distribution of medicines to millions of Africans with AIDS .
 Key focus in international trade negotiations is on banking, insurance, and related financial services . U.S. companies, companies, and some in Asia, enjoy a comparative advantage in these areas because of their information-processing technologies .
 In general, as telecommunications becomes cheaper and more pervasive, services offered by companies in one country can be efficiently used by consumers in other countries . Consumers phoning customer service at U.S. companies and connecting to India or another English-speaking developing country engage in a longdistance trade in
 In the 1990s, the U.S. arms industry, like the tobacco industry, looked overseas for new customers to offset declining demand at home . The arms industry is looking for customers in the United States .
 The Middle East has been the leading arms-importing region of the global South, with India and China increasing recently . A different problem is presented by the “industry” of illicit trade, or smuggling .
 Black markets exist for foreign currency exchange . The extent of illicit trade varies from one country and industry to another, depending on profitability and enforcement .
 International black markets for weapons trade, beyond government controls, are notorious . A state with enough money can buy— although at premium prices—most kinds of weapons .
 Economic agreements among states depend strongly on the reciprocity principle for enforcement . If one state protects its industries, or puts tariffs on the goods of other states, or violates the copyright on works produced in other countries, the main resort is to apply similar measures against offending states .
 The use of reciprocity to enforce equal terms of exchange is especially important in international trade . Trade disputes and retaliatory measures are common in trade disputes and disputes .
 Sixteen people were injured in a car crash in New York City . Sixteen of them were killed in the car crash . The victims were injured during the crash .
 U,S. hegemony helped create the major norms and institutions of international trade in the post-1945 era . For example, to be denied access to the markets today would seriously hurt export industries in many states .
 U.S. hegemony seems to be giving way to a more multipolar world, especially in economic affairs among the great powers . Now that U,S., hegemony is giving way, it's even more important for the success of the world trading system .
 Britain produces more than ten times that much per person per person in 1750 . That is less than the present level of most of the global South . However, today Britain produces far more per person . This accomplishment is due to industrialization .
 Industrial Revolution started in Britain in the 18th century, underpinning Britain’s emerging leadership role in the world economy, and spread to the other advanced economies . By around 1850, the wooden sailing ships of earlier centuries had given way to larger and faster coal-powered iron steams
 Former Soviet republics and Eastern Europe are transitional economies, changing over to a market-based economy connected to the world capitalist economy,^""^ This transition proved difficult. Now the former Soviet Republics and . Eastern Europe is transitional economies .
 In the first half of the 1990s, the total GDP of the region shrank by about 35 percent . The region's GDP shrank 35 percent, a depression worse than the Great Depression the U.S. experienced in the 1930s .
 Vladimir Putin's centralization of political power could choke off capitalist growth in Russia . China, whose government continues to follow Marxist political line, has shifted toward a market economy .
 The government sector of the economy (military spending, road building) is key to the economy . And the government sector (military and government spending) is crucial to the growth .
 Social Security makes up a substantial fraction of the industrialized countries’ economies . Social Security, and so on, is a substantial part of the economy .
 The fall in consumer demand for goods led to declines in global trade of 9 percent—the largest decline since World War II . These losses led to a global slowdown in consumer spending and production that caused large job losses in countries like the United States, China, and India .
 The ability to print one’s own currency is one of the hallmarks of state sovereignty . State sovereignty is a hallmark of sovereignty in the U.S.
 Exchange rates affect almost every international economic transaction . These exchange rates affect trade, investment, tourism, and so forth .
 If the price of the U.S. dollar goes down too much relative to other important currencies, governments step into the currency markets, side by side with private investors, and buy dollars .
 If the price gets too high, governments step in to sell dollars, increasing supply and driving the price down . Such interventions usually happen quickly, in one day, but may be repeated several times within a few weeks . Note that monetary intervention requires costly multilateral cooperation among states .
 A successful intervention can make money for governments at the expense of private speculators . States have a common interest (making sure a large economy does not collapse) aligned against transnational actors, investors .
 G20 governments step in to raise the price of U,S. dollars by buying them around the world . If they succeed, the governments can then sell again and pocket a profit .
 Argentina in the 1990s had pegged the value of its currency at a fixed rate to the U,S. dollar . The 2001 Argentine financial collapse was well illustrated in the 2001 financial collapse . Argentina's financial crisis was the result of the collapse of Argentina's economy .
 In 2010, South Korea agreed to further coordinate currency exchanges with China . Along with ASEAN countries, they are also studying the creation of an Asian currency unit that would track the aggregate value of the region’s currencies .
 In the short term, exchange rates depend on speculation about the future value of currencies . But over the long term, the value of a state’s currency tends to rise or fall relative to others .
 People do not want to own the currency of an unstable country, because political instability leads to the breakdown of economic efficiency and of trust in the currency . Conversely, political stability boosts a currency’s value .
 World currency markets are dominated by the U,S, dollar, the euro, and the Japanese yen . The U.S. dollar, euro and Japanese yen dominate the world currency markets .
 In 2006, the U.S. accused North Korea of passing off tens of millions of dollars in extremely realistic counterfeit $100 bills . The North Korean regime passed off the money at the expense of the U,S. Treasury . Despite these shared interests in currency stability, states also experience
 A unilateral move to reduce the value of one’s own currency by changing a fixed or official exchange rate is called a devaluation . Liberals view these changes as positive mechanisms for the world economy to work out inefficiencies and maximize overall growth .
 In the first three weeks of 2009, Russia devalued its ruble six times after the price of its main export, oil, plummeted . A currency may be devalued by being allowed to float freely after a period of fixed rates .
 To enforce self-discipline and enhance public trust in the value of money, these decisions are turned over to a central bank .
 The U.S. economy no longer held the overwhelming dominance it had in 1944 . European and Japanese recovery from World War II, but also because of U,S. overspending on the Vietnam War and the outflow of dollars to buy oil . The U.,S., economy
 The abandonment of the gold standard was good for the U.S. and bad for Japan and Europe, where leaders expressed shock at the unilateral U,S. actions . Europe and Japan are shocked by the unilateral actions .
 The IMF created a new world currency, the Special Drawing Right . The SDR has been called “paper gold” because it is created in limited amounts by the IMF . It is held as a hard-currency reserve by states’ central banks .
 The value of the U,S. dollar was pegged to the SDR rather than to gold, at a fixed exchange rate . SDRs are linked in value to a basket of several key international currencies .
 The G6 was later expanded to the G8 with the addition of Canada and Russia . In 2009, it was announced that the G20, including far more developed and developing countries, would begin to replace G8 .
 The quota is based on the size and strength of a state’s economy . A state can then borrow against its quota to stabilize its economy in difficult times and repay the IMF in subsequent years .
 The United States is an extraordinarily wealthy and powerful state . Consider how the past decade has changed the financial positions of the United States, of Russia and Eastern Europe, and of Asia .
 The U.S. position in scientific research and higher education is unparalleled in the world, says President Obama . The U,S. has a unique position in higher education and scientific research, he says .
 U.S. hegemony peaked after World War II, then gradually eroded as competitors gained relative ground . In the early 1950s, the U,S. economy was about twice the size of the next six advanced industrial states combined .
 This long-term decline after the extraordinary post-1945 U.S. hegemony was a natural and probably unavoidable one . This is a long and probably inevitable one, author says .
 In the early 1980s, the U.S. trade deficit (exports minus imports) grew from near zero to $200 billion in just a few years . The shifting U,S. financial position since the 1980s is illustrated in Eigure 9,1, In Eigure
 The trade deficit shrank back, but then grew to more than $700 billion a year by 2007 . After shrinking again during the 2008-2009 recession, the trade deficit began to grow again in 2010 . The budget deficit meanwhile jumped to $300 billion per year in the early 1980s
 The United States economy began the 21st century roughly, after a decade of relative prosperity in the 1990s . The bursting of an Internet investment “bubble’s” was followed by a worldwide recession in 2001 and then the economic disruptions that followed the September 2001 terrorist attacks
 By 2013, stock markets had fully recovered from the 2008 crash, but a new European recession threatened to hurt U.S. exports . New European recession threatens to hurt American exports .
 The U.S. government’s national debt grew from about $1 trillion in 1980 to $3 trillion in 1990, $5 trillion in 2000, and $16 trillion in 2013 . The interest payments are equivalent to what would otherwise be a healthy rate of economic growth .
 These U.S. financial trends have profound implications for the entire world political economy . These U,S., financial trends are having profound implications on the global economy .
 Other emerging markets around the world—notably Brazil—suffered as investors generalized the problems in Asia . The Philippines addressed the problem in the manner that international agencies and foreign investors preferred .
 Riots and student protests forced Indonesia’s President Suharto to resign after 30 years of dictatorship . But Indonesia resisted implementing the promised reforms, and its economy continued to slide .
 The Chinese government reduced inflation from 20 percent to less than 4 percent in 1995-1997 . The engineer of this tight-money policy, Zhu Rongji, became the Chinese prime minister .
 Multinational corporations are companies based in one state with affiliated branches or subsidiaries operating in other states . Most important among these private actors are MNCs, Multinational Corporations . Watch the video ""Banking Interests and Regulatory Reform"" at MyPoliSciLab .
 Almost all of the largest MNCs are based in G8 states . The automobile, oil, and electronics industries have the largest . Almost all the largest companies in the world are based within the G8 .
 Among the largest commercial banks worldwide, the United States does not hold a leading position . The traditional U,S, antitrust policy that limits banks’ geographic expansion . Financial corporations also operate multinationally— although often with more restrictions than industrial MNCs .
 McDonald’s fast-food chain and American Telephone and Telegraph are good examples . Some MNCs sell services such as McDonald's fast food .
 MNCs have a range of conflicts with their home governments . Some MNC conflicts with home governments resemble the conflicts with host governments . The conflict is similar to those with their host states .
 In the 1990s, Conoco oil company agreed to a bib lion-dollar oil development project in Iran . The U.S. government was trying to isolate Iran as a rogue state when the deal was struck .
 IR scholars continue to study the relationships between the international economic activities of MNCs and the international security activities of '1 their home governments . IR scholars have also studied the relationship between international security and international economic activity .
 To avoid inflation, industrialized states turn monetary policy over to semiautonomous central banks . By adjusting interest rates on government money loaned to private banks, a central bank can control the supply of money in the national economy . However, a sudden unilateral devaluation of the currency is
 From 1945 to 1971, this was done by pegging state currencies to the U,S, dollar and the dollar in turn to gold . From 1945 until 1971, the U.S. dollar and gold in turn were pegged to the gold .
 Multinational corporations do business in more than one state simultaneously . The largest are based in the leading industrialized states, and most are privately owned . MNCs are increasingly powerful in international economic affairs .
 MNCs try to negotiate favorable terms and look for states with stable currencies and political environments in which to make direct investments . States depend on states to maintain international stability conducive to doing business globally, ■ M.N. states depend on M.NCs to create new wealth, and
 Governments seek foreign investments on their territories so as to benefit from the future stream of income . ■ MNCs try to influence the international political policies of both their headquarters state and the other states in which they operate . ■ Governments seek such foreign investments .
 Increasingly, MNCs headquartered in different states are forming international alliances with each other . They also support stable international security relations, because war generally disrupts business, ■ Increasingly MNC firms are forming alliances .
 FDI brings capital investment that is key to economic growth . FDI Brings positive Benefits to Developing Countries . FDC Brings Capital Investment to Developed Countries .
 These lOs all contain a struggle between the contradictory forces of nationalism and supranationalism . The struggle is between state sovereignty and the authority of the higher authority of supranic structures .
 Such a shift in sovereignty to the supranational level would probably entail some version of federalism, in which states recognize the sovereignty of a central government while retaining certain powers .
 Most recently, the countries of Africa in 2002 formed the African Union . The African Union is an ambitious plan to coordinate economic and foreign policies .
 Venezuela's open border with Colombia brought in large transshipments of cocaine bound for the U.S. Eor example, in the early 1990s Venezuela found that its open border . Venezuela found in the 1990s that large amounts of cocaine were bound to the United States .
 The wave of disintegration in some ways began with the decolonization of former European empires in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East after World War II . After the Cold War, disintegration centered on Russia and Eastern Europe . States in other regions—Somalia, Democratic Congo
 Most of the next decade was spent recovering with help from the U.S. through the Marshall Plan . But already, two Erench leaders, Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman, were developing a plan to implement the idea of functionalism in Europe .
 In 1950, Schuman proposed the merger of the Erench and German steel and coal industries into a single framework that could most efficiently use the two states’ coal resources and steel mills .
 The issues involved were matters for engineers and technical experts, and did not threaten politicians . If coal and steel sound like fairly boring topics, that was exactly the idea of functionalists, that's the idea .
 Since 1952, technical experts have served as the leaders of the integration process in other aspects of European life and outside Europe . Technical lOs such as the Universal Postal Union came before political ones like the UN .
 Although technical cooperation succeeded in 1952, political and military cooperation proved much more difficult . For example, the EU operates the European Space Agency and the European Molecular Biology Laboratory .
 Euratom was formed to coordinate nuclear power development by pooling research, investment, and management . Euratom, the European Atomic Energy Community, was formed in 1953 .
 The European Free Trade Association is an extended free trade area associated with the European Union . Its members are Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, and Switzerland . In a customs union, participating states adopt a unified set of tariffs with regard to goods coming in from outside of the free trade
 Treaty of Rome committed six states to creating a customs union by 1969 . A customs union creates free and open trade within its member states, bringing great economic benefits .
 The EU structure is balanced in the EU structure by provisions that uphold the power of states and state leaders . These supranational bureaucrats are balanced in Europe's power structure .
 Politicians in member states have qualms about losing power to the Eurocrats . Citizens in those states have become more uncomfortable in recent years with the growing power of faceless EUcrats over their lives .
 The EU’s structure is illustrated in Eigure 10,1, The Eurocrats consist of a staff of 25,000, organized under the European Commission at EU headquarters in Brussels, Belgium . The Commission has 27 individual members, one from each member state, who are chosen
 The European Commission is supposed to represent the interests of Europe as a whole (supranational interests), not their own states . The Council of the European Union selects one of their members as the commission president . They select a member of their own commission president, which is only imperfectly met
 The European Commission lacks formal autonomous power except for day-to-day EU operations . The Commission reports to, and implements policies of, the Council of the European Union . The Council is a meeting of relevant ministers of each member state—politicians who control the bureaucrats .
 The Council of the European Union in theory has functioned using weighted voting based on each state’s population, but in practice it operated by consensus on major policy decisions . Recall the similar tension between politicians and career bureaucrats in national foreign policy making .
 State leaders created a special place for themselves in the EC, to oversee the direction of the community, in the 1970s . This structure again shows state leaders’ resistance to being governed by any supranational body . The Council of the European Union must approve the policies of the
 There is a European Parliament, which falls somewhat short of a true legislature passing laws for all of Europe . At present, it operates partly as a watchdog over the Commission, but with some power to legislate .
 Maastricht Treaty increased the EU budget by $25 billion annually to provide economic assistance to the poorer members of the EU . For example, to reduce the disparity between rich and poor EU states, EU budget increased to $25billion annually .
 The richer EU members pay the cost for this aid, but the richer EU pay for it . Poor countries are carried out as free riders on the collective good of EU integration, says David Cameron . The poorer EU members are carrying the burden on poorer countries .
 Greece had for years borrowed more than it could repay, and needed a European bailout to survive the global financial crisis . Greece had previously admitted to falsifying economic data in order to be admitted to the eurozone .
 In 2010, only two states in the EU actually met the EU targets for debt levels . Greece, Spain, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy all undertook large-scale economic reforms .
 Each country in the eurozone is affected by the financial policies of the others . Eor instance, deficit spending on politically popular programs would normally affect just that country’s currency . But if the country is in the euro, then that effect is spread across all the other euro countries .
 Eree riding threatens all eurozone members since an economic crisis in one country can easily spread to others through the common currency . Eree can be seen as a major economic crisis that threatens the eurozone .
 The value of the euro began to drop and world financial markets fell as anxiety increased . The instability threatened to spread to the other high-deficit euro members . This instability threatens to spread .
 The European Union and IME put together a $141 billion rescue package for Greece . In response, the European Union put together an EU-IME rescue package . Greece is one of the biggest economies in the world .
 Turkey’s GDP, growing rapidly in recent years, would add about 5 percent to the EU's GDP . Granting full membership would reward these changes, which would reward Turkey's growth .
 Supporters argue Turkey as an EU member would serve as a bridge between Europe and the Middle East region . Turkish workers could help alleviate a labor shortage in Western Europe, they say . Supporters also argue that Turkey would be an example of secular democracy to other Middle Eastern countries .
 Turkey would be the only Muslim country in the EU, yet would become the second most populous EU member after Germany . Opponents argue that EU membership would open the floodgates for immigration from a large, poor country, overwhelming the smaller and richer EU members .
 Costs to subsidize Turkish farmers and expand social programs could reach tens of billions of euros . Turkey would be the poorest member, even including Eastern European members .
 Income Levels of Old and New EU Members, 2005 $40,000 30,000 LO o o C\J cc cc H —' § ■ 20,000 CD Q Q Q_ Q CD 10,000 12 Euro Countries* Other Pre-2004 Members 10 countries 2 Countries 2
 Eurthermore, by Western European standards, the new members are relatively poor . Recall that collective goods are generally harder to provide in larger groups, where free riding is less obvious, than in smaller ones .
 The EU in the last decade has shown signs of dividing into ‘inner’ and ‘outer’ layers of the EU . EU states such as Erance and Germany joining a currency union and deepening their integration . Those such as Britain and perhaps the new members operating at the
 Since 1995, the EU has established and expanded the Schengen area, a zone in which border controls have been abolished . Goods and people move freely within the zone without stopping at borders . Still, in some areas, some areas have been strides toward integration .
 Schengen countries include the major EU states . Norway, Iceland, and Switzerland also belong, although they are not EU members .
 The European Union added 12 members, mostly from Eastern Europe, in 2004 and 2007 . The EU added 12 new members to the EU in 2004-2007 .
 The 25 leaders signed an EU constitution in late 2004 . The European Parliament gave it a strong vote of support in 2005 . To take effect, it had to be ratified by all 25 states, including several requiring referenda .
 Voters in Erance and the Netherlands rejected the constitution and the process halted . The constitution was approved by the majority of voters in both countries .
 Around the edges are the EETA states participating in the European Economic Area . EETA is part of the EU's largest economic bloc .
 With a large and universal membership of 56 states, the CSCE has little power except to act as a forum for discussions of security issues . Cperating by consensus, with a large membership, with little power . The CSCE is an international body of 56 countries .
 In the late 1990s, the CSCE shifted into new tasks such as running elections, helping political parties in Bosnia and Kosovo . CSCE also provided various forms of monitoring and assistance in half a dozen Eastern European countries .
 These various structures of the European political system, centered on the EU, are IGCs composed of states as members . The EU is the largest political system in the world, centered around the EU .
 The military importance of satellite reconnaissance has been mentioned . A powerful state such as the United States can increase its power through information technologies . The U.S. has a history of using satellite reconnaissance .
 Syria’s government used its own hackers to track down the identities of protesters anonymously posting antigovernment videos and messages on the Web . The U.S. government in response trained democracy activists in technologies of the Internet and social media .
 It is harder to fool international audiences these days, but domestic ones can still respond to propagandistic misinformation . Domestic audiences can respond to misinformation, but it is still difficult to fool them .
 Information can be used against governments as well, by foreign governments, NGOs, or domestic political opponents . Information as a Tool against Governments can also be used by governments . Governments fear the free flow of information .
 In Iran, millions of people have used the Internet to discuss taboo topics such as sex, fashion, and politics . The government was widely criticized for cracking down on protesters after a disputed election in 2009 .
 Police stormed Kenya's daily newspaper offices and burned tens of thousands of copies of the paper .
 Hackers have taken over control of U.S. government computers and unleashed costly viruses against businesses and people worldwide . The Internet in many ways empowers small fringe groups relative to states, leaving states vulnerable in new ways .
 During the U,S,China spy plane standoff in 2001, nationalistic Chinese hackers claimed to have put pro-Chinese graffiti on 1,000 U.S. Web sites, and U,U.S, hackers returned the favor .
 The Chinese communist party criticized ‘Web terrorism’ and the crisis eased . But the U,S. government worries that real terrorists could use the Internet to cause massive disruptions in U.S. economic life .
 The ability of governments to bargain effectively with each other and to reach mutually beneficial outcomes is enhanced by the availability of instant communications channels . The ability to monitor performance of agreements makes collective goods problems easier to resolve because cheaters and free riders can be identified .
 Tourism ranks among the top export industries worldwide . People who travel to other countries develop both a deeper understanding and a deeper appreciation for them .
 The emerging global culture is primarily the culture of white Europeans and their descendants in rich areas of the world . This cultural dominance has been referred to 'XC\ as cultural imperialism,^^ For many people, especially in the global South, the information revolution carrying global culture into their midst is
 Half of the world’s nearly 7,000 languages risk extinction this century, UNESCO says . The emerging global culture is dominated by the U.S. cultural influence .
 A Behind'thc'Scenes Look at the Politics, the Scandals, and the Glory of the Games . A Behindthc.'Scenes look at the politics, the scandals and the glory of the Olympics .
 The EU Integration Process Is Finished Progressing Progressing . Troubles with the proposed Constitution and new Lisbon Treaty prove there are difficulties .
 International environmental politics creates difficult collective goods problems . A sustainable natural environment is a collective good, and states bargain over how to distribute the costs of providing that good .
 This type of collective goods dilemma has been called the tragedy of the commons . It's not the only way to solve the problem: It's also the way to get the goods back on the market .
 The solution of environmental collective goods problems is based on achieving shared benefits that depend on overcoming conflicting interests . As in other areas of IPE, the solution of these problems is not only possible but also possible .
 Functional lOs specialize in technical and management aspects of the environment . Functional lOs are functional lOs that focus on the technical aspects of an environment . The lOs are functional and manage the environment of a functional environment .
 The 1992 Earth Summit established the Commission on Sustainable Development, which monitors states’ compliance with the promises they made at the Earth Summit . But it lacks powers of enforcement over national governments—again reflecting the preeminence of state sovereignty .
 China and other developing countries in Asia stand at the center of the debate over sustainable development . But progress has been slow, China and others in Asia have been slow to make progress progress .
 China has been scouring the planet for raw materials in recent years . It has also become a leader in the development of ‘green’ technology . China now dominates the production of solar panels .
 A major theme of these conferences is sustainable development . This refers to economic growth that does not deplete resources and destroy ecosystems so quickly that the basis of that economic growth is itself undermined .
 The greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide , methane gas, chlorofiuorocarbons and nitrous oxide . Carbon dioxide, methane and carbon dioxide are among the greenhouse gases .
 Data stored in “the cloud,” seemingly free from earthly concerns, actually lives in data centers that use vast amounts of electricity and run large diesel generators, contributing to global warming . Ironically, data storage in ‘the cloud’s” data centers also use vast
 The chief culprits are CFCs, until recently widely used in refrigeration and in aerosol sprays . The chief problem is the use of these chemicals in refrigerated refrigeration .
 South Africa’s foreign minister convened a small group of key players for a huddle on the conference floor . The United States, China, India, Britain, France, Sweden, Poland, Gambia, and Brazil were all present .
 The United States, which consumes half the world’s tuna catch, has gone further and unilaterally requires dolphin-safe methods be used for tuna sold in U,S. territory . The U.S. also requires the use of dolphin-friendly methods in tuna sales .
 Other countries have challenged the act through international trade organizations as an unfair restriction on tuna exports to the U.S. Such conflicts portend future battles between environmentalists and free trade advocates .
 Environmentalists do not want to give up national laws that they worked for decades to enact, over the opposition of industrial corporations . Eor example, the Clean Air Act successfully reduced air pollution in U,S. cities, but the regulations had to be revised in 1997, on order of
 Environmentalists adopted the sea turtle as a symbol of their opposition to the WTO after the WTO overturned U.S. regulations that required shrimp to be caught in nets from which sea turtles (an endangered species) can escape .
 Recent conflicts have arisen over U.S. laws restricting imports of foods with pesticide residues . European laws on imports of genetically engineered agricultural and pharmaceutical products .
 Unlike rain forests, oceans belong to no state but are a global commons . This makes the collective goods problem more difficult because there is no authority to enforce regulations .
 Treaty was signed by all states with interests in the area, including both superpowers . It sets aside territorial claims on the continent for future resolution . It establishes a regime under which various states conduct scientific research in Antarctica .
 Antarctica is largely a success story in international environmental politics . By 1991, Greenpeace had persuaded the treaty signatories to turn the continent into a “world park” Antarctica .
 China’s terrible air pollution kills nearly half a million Chinese a year, but few foreigners . With some exceptions, pollution is limited to the state where it occurs and its close neighbors .
 Several regional agreements seek to limit acid rain, caused by air pollution . European states have agreed to limit air pollution and acid rain for their mutual benefit . European forests have been heavily damaged by pollution .
 In 1988, 24 European states signed a treaty to limit nitrogen oxide emissions to 1988 levels by 1995 . After long negotiations, the United States and Canada signed bilateral agreements to limit pollution as well .
 Industrial pollution, human sewage, and agricultural fertilizers and pesticides all tend to run into rivers and seas . In 2005, a huge chemical spill in northeast China polluted a river that flows into Russia . Longstanding regional agencies that regulate shipping on European rivers now also deal with pollution .
 In 2010, the largest oil spill in U.S. history occurred in the Gulf of Mexico . The Mediterranean basin is severely polluted and difficult to manage because so many states border it .
 British Petroleum agreed to set aside billions of dollars to pay damages to residents of several southern U.S. states affected by the spill . The leakage took months to contain and highlighted the dangers associated with deep-water drilling .
 Norms have developed in recent years against exporting toxic wastes . But such wastes have been sent to developing countries for disposal, for a fee .
 In the former Soviet bloc, decades of centrally planned industrialization created more severe environmental problems . Economic strapped former Soviet republics had to bargain over limiting pollution and repairing the damage .
 Because the extraction of resources brings states wealth, these resources regularly fuel international conflicts . Because they are mostly located within individual states, however, they do not present a collective goods problem .
 The United States did not claim colonies or protectorates, but U.S. MNCs were heavily involved in the development of oil resources in the area from the 1920s through the 1960s . These U,S, and European oil companies kept the price paid to local states low
 Arab states of the region cut off their oil exports to the U.S. during an Arab-Israeli war in 1973 . The oil-producing Arab states decided to punish the United States for supporting Israel . The Arab states curtailed their overall exports of American oil .
 OPEC realized its potential power and the high price the world was willing to pay for oil . This supply disruption sent world oil prices skyrocketing . The price of oil in the Middle East is now the highest in the world's history .
 In 1979, the revolution in Iran led to a second oil shock . The economic instability and sense of U,S. helplessness seemed to mark a decline in American power and perhaps the rise of the global South .
 Solutions are enormously complicated, factoring in additional elements like shipping, fishing, smuggling, and pipeline routes . Finding agreement can take a very long time .
 Israel’s 1967 capture of the Golan Heights precluded Syria from renewing such efforts . Israeli air and artillery attacks on the construction site forced Syria to abandon its project .
 IR scholars have expanded their studies of environmental politics to systematically study the relationship of military and security affairs to the environment . IR scholars also focus on the relationship between the military and the environment of the U.S. military and environment .
 Among the world’s poorest countries, population is expected to triple in the next 50 years . Many rich countries will see ' 1 0 population shrinkage in that period .
 Birth rates fall as food supplies increase and access to health care expands . Deaths fall as a result of industrialization and the accumulation of wealth on per capita basis .
 Population Policies influence the birthrate in the global South . These population trends contributed to disparities in the 1990s, notably between Africa and Asia, notably .
 China has started to encourage wealthy and educated families to have two children . Penalties for having a second child include being charged for services that were free for the first child .
 Contraceptive and abortions are free in China . China’s policy has lowered growth rates considerably in the cities but less so in the countryside . Contraceptives and abortion are free, but abortions are also free .
 China's fertility rate fell from 6 children per woman to about 2,5 in a decade . Still, in a single decade, China’s fertility rate has fallen from 6 kids per woman . But the Chinese policy has drawbacks .
 China’s 2000 census showed the percentage of female births at 0,85 per boy, rather than the normal 0,95, a difference that amounts to a million “missing” girls per year . Most often, parents in China are using information technology to determine their fetus
 In recent years, hundreds of o 1 thousands of young women there have been kidnapped and sold as brides,^ Because of the demographic transition, controlling population growth helps economic development .
 In North America and other industrialized regions, new drug therapies (which keep the virus in check for years) dramatically lowered the death rate from AIDS starting in the late 1990s . But these treatments were too expensive to help much in Africa and other poor regions, India and Brazil began to export
 The U.S. government threatened to punish South Africa and other countries if they allowed import of these drugs without compensating U,S, corporations holding patents .
 AIDS activists demonstrated loudly and mobilized public opinion to get the policies changed . AIDS activists filed a complaint against Brazil with the WTO, In response, AIDS activists demonstrate loudly .
 The United States withdrew its complaint against Brazil in 2001 . Meanwhile, drug companies began offering lower prices to poor countries . Delivery of the drugs to millions of poor people remained painfully slow .
 AIDS has killed 30 million people and is spreading rapidly in Southeast Asia and Africa . In the past four years, the number of people receiving treatment has increased fivefold, to over 3 million .
 The worldwide effort to slow AIDS, coordinated by the World Health Organization, illustrates how global-level problems such as AIDS are making IDs such as WHO more important . AIDS is a global problem that is making IDs more important for the world .
 60 percent of China’s population has had hepatitis B, compared with 1 percent in the U.S. and Japan . AIDS illustrates the transnational linkages that make international borders less meaningful than in the past . As a result of this, 60 percent have hepatitis B .
 A dollar spent by WHO has the same effect regardless of which country contributed it . WHO has a collective goods problem regarding the allocation of costs and benefits . WHO spent the same amount of money as any country contributed .
 In 2009, MINI influenza spread rapidly across much of the world, testing the small and poorly funded international institutions devoted to global health, such as the World Health Organization . MinI influenza also tested the small, poorly funded health institutions .
 TB, malaria, hepatitis, dengue fever, and cholera have all reemerged or spread in recent decades, often mutating into drug-resistant forms . TB now kills 1,5 million people per year . Malaria sickens hundreds of millions of people and kills
 A measles vaccination campaign now reaches 85 percent of infants worldwide, reducing deaths by 80 percent since 2000 . Sadly, a polio vaccination drive in Pakistan was cut short in 2012 after Taliban militants killed health workers, claiming the vaccine was a Western plot to sterilize Muslim children .
 International campaign has increased the use of iodized salt from 25 percent of households worldwide in 1990 to 66 on percent in 2006 .
 Smoking Worldwide, more than a billion people smoke, five-sixths of them in developing countries, and 5 million people a year die from tobacco-related disease .
 India and China threatening to become economically successful . Now, they have a chance to become the world's largest economies .
 Western states want to place limitations on how other states can develop and how they can treat the environment . Western states say they want to limit how they treat other states' environment .
 Although billions of people are rising out of poverty, the number of very poor people remains about the same . Because of population growth, population growth is still the same at the highest level .
 Since 1990, 2 billion people have gained access to improved drinking water, but 1 billion remain hungry around the world . 1 billion people remain hungry worldwide .
 China South Asia Africa Africa Middie East Latin America $10,000 GDP per Capita . For the global North overall, GDP per capita Is $30,000 . World Bank. 12% of GDP .
 Watch the Video ""Global Migration and Employment"" at MyPoliSciLab regions regions .
 The third method is immunization against six common deadly diseases: measles, polio, tuberculosis, tetanus, whooping cough, and diphtheria . Worid Bank. Worid bank.
 The growth of urban population is caused by people moving to the cities from the countryside . They are further along in the demographic transition and have lower birthrates than people in the countryside, rather .
 Many states have considered policies to break up large land holdings and redistribute land to poor peasants for use in subsistence farming . The main opponents of land reform are large landowners, who often wield great political power .
 When food is in short supply, men and boys often eat first, with women and girls getting what is left . Yet women hold inferior social status to men in the South, even more so than in the North .
 Most industrialized states try to limit immigration from the global South . Despite border guards and fences, many people migrate anyway, illegally, illegally .
 In the United States, such immigrants come from all over the world, but mostly from Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean . In Western Europe, they come largely from North Africa, Turkey, and Eastern Europe, some worry .
 In 2004-2006, tens of thousands of migrants and refugees from sub-Saharan Africa came to Morocco and climbed over razor-wire fences to enter two tiny Spanish enclaves there .
 The increase in migrants trying to reach the enclaves in Morocco followed Spanish efforts to stem the flow of migrants . Once on Spanish soil, they could not be sent home if they kept authorities from determining their nationality, they said .
 International law and custom distinguish migrants from refugees, people fleeing to find refuge from war, natural disaster, or political persecution . International norms obligate countries to accept refugees who arrive at their borders .
 These refugees crossing from war-torn Libya into Tunisia in 2011 show their Bangladesh passports .
 The number of international refugees in the world was about 10 million in 2012 . About 15 million more people were displaced within their own countries . About 10 million refugees were displaced in 2012, about 15 million within their countries .
 The majority of refugees and IDPs have been displaced by wars, most recently by the civil war in Syria . Three-fourths of these internally displaced persons resided in Colombia, Congo, Somalia, Sudan, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria . An additional 4 million Palestinian refugees fall under the
 The poverty of the refugees fuels radical political movements among the inhabitants . They live in “camps” that have become long-term neighborhoods, mainly in Jordan, Lebanon and the Palestinian territories of Gaza and the West Bank .
 resentment of foreign immigrants has fueled upsurges of right-wing nationalism in domestic politics . In recent decades this issue has become a major one throughout the North . In Germany, France, Austria, Germany, and elsewhere, resentment has fueled right wing nationalism .
 Remittances are important for states in many regions . They are an important source of income for many poor countries . Remittance is an important income source for many countries .
 Almost all have some form of mixed economy 'ZD that includes both private and state ownership . Almost all of the countries in the U.S. have mixed economy economies .
 The problem is that, just as industrial infrastructure is located in the North, so is the world’s information infrastructure . While a generation of students in industrialized countries go online, poorer countries still struggle to extend literacy to rural populations .
 Having exportable natural resources would seem a big plus for an economy . But the problems of basing economic growth on resource exports have been called the resource curse . The problems are based on the fact that resource exports are a problem .
 S Asia Emergence of Hinduism, Buddhism; Ancient India; Arab conquest Turkish period Taj Mahal Europear built . Africa Kingdom of Ghana Yoruba, Mali, Benin slave trade — Congo Zimbabwe Buganda Ashanti .
 Pan-Arabism, especially strong in the 1950s and 1960s, saw the region as potentially one nation again, with a single religion, language, and identity . Eor example, Pan Arabism , especially strong .
 The military revolution of the period created the first modern armies . European monarchs put cannons on sailing ships and began to ‘discover’ the world . The first modern army was created by monarchs .
 The history of having been colonized by Europeans is central to their national identity, foreign policy, and place in the world . Eor most states in the global South have a history of colonizing .
 International relations revolves around asymmetrical power relationships with industrialized states . Eor these states— especially for those within them who favor socialist perspectives— are more likely to be socialists .
 Zambia's Eor Zambia was copper ore; for El Salvador, coffee, coffee; for Botswana, diamonds . For Botswana it was diamonds; for Zambia, it was copper . For El Salvador it was coffee, copper ore and coffee .
 Infrastructure such as railroads most likely was set up to serve the export economy . Eurthermore, railroads were set up in order to help the export industry .
 Governments of many postcolonial states did not function very effectively, creating another obstacle to accumulation . E.E. E.C. states did function very well, creating a problem for accumulation, he says .
 The rules of the international system now work for the revolutionaries instead of against them, j once they control a state . The rules are now working for the revolutionists, j .
 Their state also has the same geographical as before, the same historical conflicts with its neighbors, and the same ethnic ties . Their state is still in the same state as before .
 Nelson Mandela had unusual success in making from a revolutionary government as the difficult transition from revolutionary to state leader, and then leaving office from its predecessor . So it is not unusual over time to South Africa's former president, Nelson Mandela, find similar foreign policies .
 Chapter 12 discussed the situation in the global South and how it came to be . This chapter takes up the question of what to do about it . Qy Watch the Video ""Authors' Chapter Introduction' at MyPoliSciLab Experiences .
 Before China took off, a handful of poor states achieved self-sustaining capital accumulation, with impressive economic growth . The newly industrializing countries were known as the newly industrialized countries .
 Worid Bank Nationai Accounts Data, and OECD Nationai accounts data fiies fiies . Topic: Economic Poiicy & Debt; Code NY.GDP.PCAP.KDZG; Database: WDi.WDi.KZG .
 In 2009, the large Western economies announced that they would not be exempt from the tax system . The tax system was designed to help the poor .
 Corruption in the global South presents a collective goods problem for states and MNCs in the  World Bank .
 The top five on the list in 2012 were Somalia, North Korea, Afghanistan, Sudan, and Burma . In 1997, the world’s 29 leading industrialized states agreed to forbid their companies from bribing foreign officials .
 In 1999, a consortium led by ExxonMobil and backed by World Bank loans struck a deal to build a $4 billion oil pipeline in Chad . Chad promised to use 72 percent of the money to reduce poverty, with oil revenues going through a Citibank account in London .
 Capital from the global North moves to the South and potentially spurs growth there in several forms . Foreign investment, debt, and foreign aid could spur growth in South .
 Private capital flows to the global South were about $500 billion in 2012, four times the amount given in official development assistance . Eoreigners who invest in a country then own the facilities .
 Many governments in the global South have feared the loss of control that comes with foreign investments by MNCs . Host governments can share in the wealth by charging fees and taxes, or by leasing land or drilling rights .
 Failure to make scheduled payments, called a default, is considered a drastic action because it destroys lenders’ confidence and results in cutoff of future loans . Rather than defaulting, borrowers usually attempt debt renegotiation—reworking the terms on which a loan will be repaid .
 North-South debt encompasses several types of lending relationships, all of which are influenced by international politics . Occasionally state-to-state loans are written off altogether, for political reasons, as happened with U.S. loans to Egypt after the Gulf War .
 Between 2005 and 2009, over $100 billion in debt had been forgiven . The first $40 billion, owed by 18 countries, began to be written off in 2006 .
 IMF demands that inflation be brought under control, which requires reducing state spending and closing budget deficits . The terms insisted on by the IMF are usually painful for the citizens (and hence for national politicians)
 The pain inflicted by conditionality agreements is often politically unpopular in the global South . On quite a few occasions, a conditionality agreement has brought rioters into the streets demanding the restoration of subsidies for food and gasoline .
 IME conditions have also proved unpopular in developed countries that needed assistance during the 2008-2009 recession . Of course, these IMe conditions have proved unpopular .
 Iceland was forced to make fundamental reforms to its banking sector . After receiving a $6 billion rescue package from the IME, Iceland made fundamental reforms . Iceland's banking sector has been hit hard by the recession .
 Greece agreed to eliminate several paid holidays while cutting wages of all public workers by 3 percent . Greece received over $133 billion from the IME . Greece has agreed to cut all public wages by 3 per cent .
 Few states in the global South can afford this legal process, and therefore few use it to help their own industries knock down unfair barriers to trade . Such legal disputes can cost millions of dollars to litigate, requiring expensive lawyers and a large staff .
 The WTO has a Generalized System of Preferences to help poor states use trade to boost their economic growth . These measures are exceptions to the overall rules of trade, intended to ensure participation in world trade advances rather than impedes development .
 The NIEO proposal also called for the promotion of industrialization in the global South and for increased development assistance from the North . The proposal never became much more than a rallying cry for the South, partly because of the South’s lack of power .
 Democracy Assistance and PolitP cal Conditionality. A Comparative Analysis of Democracy Assistance . Assistance and Conditionality . A Comparable Analysis of the Democracy Assistance. Assistance and Politics Assistance and . Conditionality of the Assistance Assistance. The Assistance Assistance and Political Assistance.
 UN programs focus on concentrating capital, transferring technology, and developing workforce skills for manufacturing . UNIDO works on industrialization, UNITAR on training and research . Other UN programs are focused on transferring technology and transferring technology .
 UN programs focus on meeting basic needs . UN programs have three advantages in promoting economic development . UNICEF, UNFPA, UNESCO, UNESCO and WHO are among the most successful UN programs .
 UN workers may be more likely to make appropriate decisions because of their backgrounds . UN workers who come from the global South or have worked in other poor countries in a region may be sensitive to local conditions and to the pitfalls of development assistance than are aid workers from rich countries .
 A major disadvantage faced by UN development programs is that they are funded largely through voluntary contributions by rich states . The UN can organize its assistance on a global scale, giving priority to projects and avoiding duplication .
 UN programs have a reputation for operating in FIGURE 13 . UN says only 5 percent of $500 million pledged for southern Sudan had actually been paid .
 They work at the request and under the direction of the host state but are paid an allowance by the U,S. government . They work under the orders of host states but receive an allowance .
 By 2008, private aid flows from DAG countries neared $130 billion, according to the OECD . Private aid flows to DAG nations from the U.S. are estimated to be at a high level of $100 billion .
 Oxfam has tried to minimize the role in its projects of governments in both the North and South . The group’s philosophy of a ‘rights-based approach to development’ has drawn praise from human rights NGOs .
 The one type of foreign assistance that is the least politically motivated is disaster relief . Yet because of the Iron Triangle’s lobbying power, Congress killed off the proposal to allow purchase of local food .
 When disaster strikes a poor state, many people are left with no means of subsistence and often without their homes . It is the kind of foreign assistance given when poor people are afflicted by famine, drought, earthquakes, flooding, or other natural disasters .
 In 2006, the UN set up a $500 million fund to enable it to respond quickly to disasters without waiting to raise funds first . Contributions of governments, private charitable organizations, and other groups and agencies are coordinated through the UN Office of the Disaster Relief Coordinator in Geneva .
 The international community has addressed children’s needs through agencies for humanitarian, public health, and economic development assistance . This benefit is enjoyed by humanity regardless of how much anyone contributes to it, says author .
 In 2000, the UN adopted the Millennium Development Goals for reducing poverty in the global South . Most of the MDGs affect children, and UNICEF is a core participant . The MDGs were adopted by the UN in 2000, and most of them affect children .
 Embarrassing failures in the past were rarer in the 1990s . Groups coordinate their actions '1 '1'1 more effectively .
 This somewhat spontaneous coordination of states, lOs, and NGOs seems contrary to the anarchical international system . This sort of coordination of state and NGO coordination is contrary to an anarchic international system, says the author .
 20,000 herders brought to the lake to learn fishing were left in an overcrowded, overgrazed environment . Every tree was cut for firewood and Felling, Mark Felling .
 Muslims See Islam, mutually assured destruction . The possession of second-strike nuclear capabilities ensures that neither of two adversaries could prevent the other from destroying it in a war .
 The United States maintains troops in Japan and is committed to defend Japan if attacked . Japan pays the United States to offset about half the cost of maintaining the troops, war crimes Violations of the law governing the conduct of warfare .
 The World Bank was established in 1944 as a source of loans to help reconstruct the European economies . World Bank is the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
 Entries for tables and figures are followed by “tabk” and “/ig.respectively” Entries include tables, figures and figures .
 Puerto Rico, 14 Punishment, deterrence and, 74 Putin, Vladimir, 160, 185, 312,339 Al Qaeda, al. Qaeda . Al Qaeda. Al Qaeda . al.Qaeda. Al. Qaeda. Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico,. 14 Punished, deterrence, and,