 Wait to see what Castro does as the new leader of Cuba . Declare war on Cuba. Declare War on Cuba .
 The previous leader of Cuba, General Batista, might have been pro-USA but he had also been a dictator who had been extremely unpopular . The previous president of Cuba was extremely unpopular. He was also unpopular.
 Cubans loyal to America or believe in capitalism are expelled from the country as well . Cubans who are loyal to the U.S. or are opposed to capitalism will be expelled from Cuba as well as the country .
 Protest to the U.N. asking them to force Cuba to allow American companies back in . U.S. companies back into Cuba .
 Cuba’s economy depends heavily on buying sugar from the U.S. However, on the other hand Cuba's economy relies heavily on America buying sugar . Cuba has a long history of buying American sugar .
 This might have meant that Cuba never became a big problem . It might have been a good thing for the Americans .
 The United Nations would probably launch an investigation . However, the United States public won’t be impressed at your ‘laissezfaire’ attitude to the rise of Communism so close to America. b. points .
 This could take a long time to solve the issue . c. c. points – The best option is to wait for the next few months .
 Economic sanctions seen as peaceful way of solving a problem without starting a war . Economic sanctions are seen as a peaceful way to solve problems without starting war .
 This could well start a nuclear war if Russia come to the aid of Cuba . Cuba is heavily dependent on you so may well reverse their decision to get rid of American businesses .
 Offer to start selling American oil to Cuba and start buying Cuban sugar again . Offer to sell U.S. oil and buy sugar from Cuba again .
 Complain to Russia that Cuba is in your backyard and they should stay out of its affairs . Complain that Russia should not meddle in Cuba's affairs .
 Declare to the world that America will not tolerate Russia interference in Cuba . Declare U.S. not tolerate Russian interference in Cuban affairs. Declare the world .
 Cuba is only 90 miles away from the USA and was within its sphere of influence . Cuba was within the U.S. and within the country's sphere of control .
 The USA had not got involved when the Soviet’s put down the Hungarian Uprising of 1956 because they had respected that it was part of the USSR's sphere of influence . The USA did not get involved in the Hungarian uprising because they respected the Soviet Union's influence in Hungary .
 It could improve relations but it is unlikely to work now that Castro is getting everything he needs from the Russians . Khrushchev is desperate to gain the upper hand in the Cold War . The rest of the world don't want a nuclear war so probably wouldn't do anything .
 Reject the idea in case it angers the Russians Invade Cuba but only use ex-Cuban exiles living in America so if it goes wrong no Americans die . Reject it in case the idea angers Russians .
 Invade Cuba supporting the Cuban exiles with American warplanes, troops and battleships . Invade Cubans with U.S. warplanes and troops and battle ships .
 If any American troops are involved in an invasion then the Russians might see it as an act of war and might offer military support to Cuba . If any U.S. troops are in Cuba, it could be seen as a 'act of war'
 By using ex-Cuban exiles it will look like a civil war as opposed to a war between the USA and Cuba . The use of American troops could well lead to a retaliation from the Russians and a possible nuclear war .
 The invasion was a disaster and was easily defeated by Castro and his supporters within two days . The invasion of Cuba was a two-day disaster for the Cuban government .
 Castro asks Khrushchev to help him defend Cuba in case of further attacks . Castro: 'I want to defend Cuba from further attacks' Castro: "I'm going to defend my country from any further attacks"
 Declare war on Cuba and send U.S. troops to remove the Communist regime . Declare to remove Cuba's Communist regime and send troops .
 U2 spy planes to fly over Cuba regularly to check whether nuclear missiles are being placed on the island . Order U2 spies planes to check if nuclear missiles have been placed there .
 Send a letter to Khrushchev saying that you will remove your missiles from Turkey, as long as he promises not to put nuclear missiles on Cuba . The letter would be sent to the Soviet-Krushchev .
 If the USSR put nuclear missiles on Cuba it will mean that they will be able to attack America without spending large amounts of money developing more ICBMs . The USSR could attack the U.S. without spending a lot of money on developing new ICBM missiles .
 If you remove missiles from Turkey it will mean that you face public humiliation and you lose the upper hand in the arms race, says President Vladimir Putin . Putin says it will be a 'public humiliation' if it is removed from Turkey .
 Russia will come to the aid of Cuba and this could start a nuclear war . b. points will help you collect evidence to find if there is a legitimate reason to invade Cuba . c. points – This might be good enough to convince Khrushchev not to place missiles on Cuba,
 Kennedy warned the USSR that he would prevent them by ‘whatever means necessary’ from placing nuclear missiles on Cuba . Kennedy: ‘Whatever means necessary,’ he would stop them from doing so .
 American spy plane flew over Cuba in October 1962 to take photos of missile sites in Cuba . Spy plane took incredible detailed photographs of Cuban missile sites .