 The 1962 Cuban missile crisis is one of the most studied and analyzed events in history . The 1962 missile crisis was a major event in American history .
 It was the most dramatic showdown between the U.S. and Soviet Union during the Cold War . The United States and the Soviet Union fought in the first World War II battle .
 'Camelot' has been the subject of popular movies, self-serving memoirs, and propaganda by Kennedy court-historians . It has been subject to popular movies and propaganda to perpetuate the legend of Camelot by depicting President John F Kennedy as master of crisis management .
 Serhii Plokhy is the director of Harvard’s Ukrainian Research Institute and the author of numerous books on Russian and Soviet history . He begins Nuclear Folly, his new history of the Cuban crisis, by debunking the “often self-serving and inaccurate”
 Plokhy refuses to accept the still dominant narrative of U.S. historians and presidential scholars that credits President Kennedy and his advisers with masterful crisis management .
 President Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev “marched from one mistake to another” during the Cuban missile crisis . Plokhy writes that instead of mastery and clear-headedness, the leaders ‘marched’ to another mistake .
 The Kennedy-Khrushchev relationship began indirectly during the 1960 presidential campaign . The Kennedy and Khrushchev relationship started indirectly in 1960s .
 According to Plokhy, Khrushchev ordered the KGB to help Kennedy’s campaign because he viewed Kennedy as “less tough” than Republican candidate Richard Nixon . The KGB helped Kennedy because he was less tough than Nixon, according to the report .
 Robert Kennedy in December 1960 on behalf of his brother discussed with the same KGB “journalist” ways in which both countries could accommodate each other over a nuclear test ban, Berlin, and China .
 The backdrop to the Cuban missile crisis included the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, the Kennedy-Khrushchev summit meeting in Vienna, and the construction of the Berlin Wall .
 All three events convinced Khrushchev that Kennedy was inexperienced and weak . Kennedy was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 This produced what the “red gamble’s decision to secretly ship to Cuba nuclear missiles, tactical nuclear weapons, nuclear-capable bombers, and large numbers of Soviet troops, says Plohky . This led to the secret shipment of nuclear weapons and troops to Cuba .
 Khrushchev knew, despite the “missile gap’s rhetoric of the Kennedy campaign, that “the American and Soviet nuclear missile arsenals were unequal.” “The U.S. and . Soviet nuclear missiles were unequal,” says Khrush
 He had virtually no rockets capable of reaching the United States to serve as a deterrent” to America’s formidable strategic arsenal .
 The U.S. had advantages of three-to-one in long-range bombers, six to one in missiles, and 16-to one in nuclear warheads . In fact, the United States had advantage of three to one bombers and six nuclear warheads, the author says .
 Khrushchev’s gamble, if successful, would close this missile gap by threatening much of the eastern United States with intermediate range nuclear missiles . It would act as a deterrent to any further U.S. attempts to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba .
 The Soviets first sent antiaircraft missiles to Cuba . Soviet officials hoped the weapons would conceal the subsequent shipment of offensive nuclear missiles .
 Khrushchev also played what Plokhy calls his “Berlin card” to distract the Kennedy administration from developments in Cuba . The Kennedy administration was focused on the Cuban situation .
 During this time, U.S. Attorney General Robert Kennedy continued to oversee the administration’s efforts to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba . Operation Mongoose was codenamed ‘Operation Mongoose’ during the time .
 Robert Kennedy suggested a Cuban attack on a U.S. military base at Guantanamo Bay to provide a pretext for invading the island and overthrowing the Castro government . Kennedy suggested that the United States forces would stage a Cuba attack on the base to provide the pretext for invasion .
 CIA estimates of Soviet arms and men being sent to Cuba were consistently wrong . CIA estimates were consistent with the fact that Soviet weapons and men were being sent there .
 The first medium-range ballistic missiles landed in Cuba on September 9, 1962 . They were launched in Cuba in 1962 .
 CIA sources provided information that the missiles had arrived, and that was confirmed by a U-2 flight’s photographic evidence on October 14th . The missiles are believed to have arrived .
 The CIA estimated that there were about 8,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba . There were 40,000 in Cuba, the CIA estimated . The CIA said there were only about eight,000 personnel .
 Plokhy details the so-called “ExCom” meetings that occurred daily at the White House during the missile crisis . The book also details Khrushchev’s relevant discussions with top Soviet political and military leaders .
 President Kennedy initially sided with the ‘hawks’ and favored an air strike to take out the missiles before they became operational . At ExCom meetings, President Kennedy sided with ExCom and favored air strike .
 Later, he sided with the ‘doves’ who favored trading U.S. missiles in Turkey and Italy for Soviet missiles in Cuba . He favored the "doves" who favored the deal .
 He proposed threatening Khrushchev with the transfer of nuclear warheads to the West German government . He even proposed threatening to transfer nuclear warheads .
 Publicly, the Kennedy administration agreed to refrain from invading Cuba in return for the Soviets removing nuclear missiles and bombers from Cuba . The Kennedy administration said it would not invade Cuba in exchange for removing the nuclear missiles .
 Kennedy agreed to dismantle U.S. medium-range nuclear missiles in Turkey at a future date . Privately, Kennedy said he would dismantle the missiles at a later date .
 This was no great “victory” for the U.S. as it has repeatedly been portrayed, it has been portrayed . This is no great "victory" for the United States as it's repeatedly portrayed .
 Some observers have viewed the Cuban missile crisis as a defeat for the U.S.
 Shortly after the crisis faded, James Burnham criticized Kennedy for acquiescing in the continuation of the communist regime in Cuba .
 In 1987, columnist George Will wrote that the missile crisis effectively killed the Monroe Doctrine . Will said it led to subsequent communist victories elsewhere in the Western Hemisphere . Will: The missile crisis led to communist victories .
 Kennedy should have insisted on a neutralized, disarmed Cuba, historian says . U.S. strategic, conventional and geographic advantages at that time, he says .
 Khrushchev was removed from power by his Politburo colleagues in 1959 . The following year, the following year he was removed by his colleagues .
 In the end, Plokhy concludes, what prevented nuclear war from breaking out was the mutual fear of nuclear war . In the world's first nuclear war, nuclear war was averted by the fear of war .
 He has also contributed to other books as well as written numerous articles and book reviews on foreign policy .
 Mr Sempa is Assistant United States Attorney for the Middle District of Pennsylvania . He is Assistant U.S. Attorney .
 The views reported in this review are those of the reviewer and not those of U.S. government . The views are those reported by the reviewer .