 The journalistic quandary of whether to report all that you know, even if doing so may jeopardize national security is not a new one . Shalom Sokolow: Their Responsibility to Withhold is a responsibility .
 At the behest of the Kennedy administration, they withheld publication until the president determined it was safe to do so . The Kennedy administration withheld publication of the story .
 Shalom Sokolow, author of the essay, won first place in the Senior Division for the 2003 National History Day competition . The essay was published in the 2003 edition of the National History Book .
 Max Frankel of theNew of The press happened Yorl·^ Times andupon Murreysome very sen Marder of The Washington Post deduced that the Soviet Union had placed nuclear weapons in Cuba . Max Franke of The New York Times said that the Soviets had placed the
 A week later, John Scali was approached by Alexander Fomin, a KGB operative . Fomin recruited the ABC News reporter to convey a negotiating offer to the White House in a desperate attempt to achieve a peaceful resolution for the removal of those weapons .
 They became convinced that revealing all they knew might precipitate disaster . However, they feared revealing all their secrets could precipitate a disaster .
 Max Frankel, a New Yo Times reporter based in Washington, D.C., phoned the ambassador fr West Germany . The Times and The Post published the call on October 19, 1962, at 10:30 p.m.
 Frankel had been observing feverish activity at the Stat Department . He wanted to know the location of the crisis that he feared was brewing . Frankel feared the crisis was brewing.
 The diplomat had already gone to bed, so the journique deduced that nothing was amiss in Berlin .
 The following night, Murrey Marder observed a frenzy of arrivals and departures at the State Department's Latin American Bureau and its Bureau of International Organization Affairs . The State Department is responsible for the United States delegatio to the United Nations .
 Marder further realized that not much was h pening elsewhere in the building . He also realized not much of the building was empty .
 Marder, encouraged by his initial success at penetrating the department's cloak of secrecy, attempted to confirm his dire suspicions . He attempted to find out what had happened to him, but was unsuccessful .
 John F Kennedy in the White House (Bost Houghton Mifflin Company, 1965), 809. JFK in the Oval Office . JFK's White House memoirs are published in 1965 .
 President Kennedy had only found out about the missiles, himself, five days earlier . He was weighing his options of how to respond, including blockading shipping to the island .
 Until he was ready to address the American people, Kennedy did not want the full magnitude of the crisis to be exposed . Kennedy was not ready to speak out until he was fully prepared to speak .
 Kennedy either told Graham the truth and entreated him not to print it, or he hinted that the Post would be embarrassed if it concluded definitively that there was a crisis in Cuba because the ""real"" activity was actually in Berlin .
 President Obama and President Obama had dinner together just five days before the missile threat . The two men were friends; they had eaten dinner together .
 Graham agreed to muzzle Marder when he agreed that it would be to the pair's mutual benefit . It is conceivable that Graham was hop ing that when Graham agreed that he was muzzleing, he was doing it for his own benefit .
 Kennedy would be able to control the story until his anticipated Monday night speech to the nation . Graham and Kennedy would both have a sound conscience, knowing that he was allowing the commander-in-chief to protect his citizens .
 Monday's article was published unsigned in order to show that the entire Post organization was responsible for the decision . The decision was made by the Post .
 Frankel was composing an article for the next clay's paper . Meanwhile, back at The Times on Sunday, October 21, Frankel had been writing for The Times .
 Frankels account of Reston deal was repudiated by Reston biographer John Stacks . Stacks agrees with Frankel's account of the deal .
 We struck out on Berlin and by a process of elimi nation figured it had to be Cuba, Cuba, offensive missiles in Cuba . The U.S. struck out at Berlin and decided to go to Cuba .
 The Washington bureau knew that the placement of nuclear weapons by the Soviet Union in Cuba was a possibility that the intelligence community feared, and then applied that knowledge to the developing situation . Perhaps, this is how .
 By the time of the phone call, Kennedy had decided on a course of action . Kennedy had already made a decision to take action against Obama .
 James B Reston and the Rise and Fall of American Journalism (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 2003), 209. Reston: The rise and fall of American journalism was the rise of the American press . Reston's book, Reston, is published by Reston at
 Reston permitted Frankel to listen in on his conversation with Kennedy on a phone extension . Reston granted Frankel access to his conversation on an extension of his phone . Frankel was allowed to call Reston on the extension .
 A quarantine, as opposed to a blockade, is not considered an act of war . A quarantine is a quarantine, not considered a war, not a blockade .
 If you reveal my plan, or print that we discovered their missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev could beat us to the draw . I'm going to order a blockade—a blockade of all Soviet shipping to Cuba,** .
 He would make some preemptive move or counter with an ultimatum that would force us to take more violent action, he says . He would counter with a threat to force the U.S. to take violence, he adds .
 Ex-com only really feared a minor public statement from the Kremlin; it was still certainly to Kennedy's advantage to be able to release the news on his own terms .
 Reston tried to convince his staff, especially Frankel, to heed Kennedy's warning . Reston said Frankel should not have been allowed to leave the country .
 All present, however, did know that the ultimate decision would lie in the hands of Orvil Dryfoos, The Times' publisher . The Times will hold a vote on the decision in the fall .
 Frankel was skeptical at first, arguing that the paper had a right to reveal what the president had said, off the record, about his planned blockade . Frankel: "We'd [The Times journalists] doped out ourselves'^1 Furthermore, just eighteen months ago, just
 Khrushchev gave the Soviets more time to approach the Americans diplomatically, but it did nothing to immediately relieve the threat posed by the soon-to-be operational missiles . An air strike quite possibly would have been able to destroy the missiles .
 Kennedy did not even bother to use the euphemism ""quarantine"" as he was already flabbergasted by how much the Times knew . When speaking to Reston, Kennedy didn't use the term "quarantine"
 Frankel felt that had his employer printed out all that it knew in that situation, the administration might have been forced to scuttle the reckless attack . Frankel: "Had his employer had printed out that information, the White House might have scuttled the attack"
 The Times knew fully well that concern over Cuba was more than ""hinted at,"" and that it also omitted any refrence to offensive weapons .
 ABC News veteran diplomatic correspondent John Scali received a call from Alexander Fomin, legally a ""counselor"" to, but really the KGB station chief at, the Soviet embassy in Washington, to Scali . Fomin was legally a "counsellor" to,
 The two had met before, and similar to the relationship between Times' reporters and CIA employees, they often used accounts of each others' exploits to mutual benefit . Fomin got a better feeling for what the American press was thinking about various Soviet policies, and Scali received exclusive stories that
 The two decided to meet immediately at the Occidental Restaurant, just steps from the White House . The restaurant is located on Pennsylvania Avenue and E Street .
 It was not unusual for the Soviets to approach the American government through media personnel . Fomin suggested to Scali that day went far beyond any previous use of this back-channel medium in both its sensitivity and importance .
 Scali knew that the nascent negotiations in which he was act ing as a conduit could prove to be instrumental in resolving the nuclear crisis . Scali was acting as an intermediary in the negotiations .
 He also knew that if he participated faithfully, it could only be beneficial to his career later down the road . And he also knew if he did it, it would only benefit his career down the line .
 Scali bounded out of the restaurant, heading straight for Roger Hilsman, the State Department's director of intelligence and research . Fomin had finished his speech .
 The reporter was brought to the White House by Secretary of State Dean Rusk . Secretary Rusk consulted with the secretary of state .
 Khrushchev sent an emo tional, rambling letter to Kennedy, decrying the possibility of nuclear conflict and urging an immediate resolution . At about the same time that this was unfolding, this was a rambling, rambolic letter .
 The two incidents were seen by many as a two-pronged approach by the Soviet leader that would necessitate an American response . The U.S. responded to the two incidents .
 For those who had been apprised of the development, things seemed to be looking brighter . For those with those who were appriding of the news, things were looking better .
 The tide again turned, but the next morning, Saturday, October 27, was dourly . The next day, the tide turned again, this time quite douringly, but it was not the same thing .
 Another message had arrived from Moscow, but this one was cold and formal . It was obviously not written by Khrushchev, himself . The message was cold, formal, obviously not signed by the former leader himself .
 Scali accused Fomin of having perpetrated ""a stinking double cross,"" negotiating in bad faith in order to provide more time for the busy missile crews . It made no mention of the previous letter and instead called for a trade whereby the Soviets would dismantle their Cuban arsenal only if the
 The Soviet agent vehemently denied this and attempted to placate the journalist, assuring him that the second letter was the result of a ""mix up"" in some high-level bureaucrat's office in the Kremlin . The agent said that the letter was a mistake and that it was a
 Attorney General Robert Kennedy conceived the idea to agree to 42 . Attorney General Kennedy agreed to the agreement . Despite the ensuing con fusion, the agreement was never consumable .
 Scali was kept abreast of Fomin's message to Kennedy . The president joked that Scali should perhaps join Ex-com .
 The younger Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and agreed unequivocally to the terms of the offer . The younger JFK met with the Soviet ambassador and agreed to the deal .
 The United States would remove the obso lete Jupiters in six months, he said . He also provided a private assurance that as long as it was not publicized, the U.S. would remove them from the country . The U.N. will also remove the
 Years later, the journalist protagonists were proud of how they had performed throughout the turmoil . Reactions and Conclusions: Years later they would be proud of their actions .
 According to the administration, the reporters all acted properly, and were instrumental in protecting the lives of their fellow citizens . The administration says they acted properly .
 Reston: 'Looking at this episode twenty-five years later, one may be astonished ... at the presumption of these young reporters' Reston was impressed by Reston's instant readiness to take Kennedy at his word .
 Kennedy had asked for the calls he got, and he surely did not think that taking such calls was a distraction from his work on the crisis . Kennedy said, "I don't want to be distracted from my work"
 No one but the president could have stopped The Post and The Times that Sunday . The president could not have stopped the Post and Times .