 THEWORLD BEGGED for CHAOS but JFK GAVE them ""STABILITY"": New views of the Cuban missile crisis: Chaos may have been closer than we think .
 Kennedy and Khrushchev “had the power to blow up the world, but they were both horrified by the thought of nuclear Armaggedon,” he writes . Kennedy was “horrified” by the idea of a nuclear armaggedon .
 There's nothing easier than acquiescing to the oppressive forces that conspire to keep people unfree . To the contrary, there's nothing easy to do, says the author .
 The Obama candidacy rests on the assumption that they are a majority in the West . That's what the dictators want themselves and there's always an isolationist constituency in West that doesn't give a rat's patootie how other peoples are treated .
 It is embracing chaos that is hard and fighting to grant people abroad the same God-given rights that we enjoy . It's embracing chaos hard and embracing people abroad, it is hard, it's hard .
 No one will be able to issue a similar sentence on the Shi'a and Kurds of Iraq . Fortunately, no matter how this election turns out, because W understood the stakes better than Ike, no one will .
 The dark, bitter and long night through which Cuba endures has witnessed the imprisonment and execution of thousands of dissenters, religious persecution, and ultimately a cruel internal “blockade” inherent to Communism . Cuba has thwarted the creative power of a resourceful people and which is the
 Almost 20 percent of the Cuban population of this planet lives outside the island . Now, almost twenty percent of Cuba's population is outside of the island, according to CNN.com .
 Children were the first in my lineage to be born outside Cuba since the nineteenth century . And my family’s generational continuity was not meant to be .
 "I have been blessed to live breathing American freedom all of my life, in a society skeptical of false messiahs and which repudiates tyranny," he says .
 Many in the world have accepted the propaganda of the Cuban revolution, he says . Consequently, what has always confounded me is the complacency with which so many have accepted it, he writes .
 The dark, bitter and long night through which Cuba endures has witnessed the imprisonment and execution of thousands of dissenters, religious persecution, and ultimately a cruel internal “blockade” inherent to Communism . Cuba has thwarted the creative power of a resourceful people and which is the
 If Kennedy had followed up the reports of Soviet troops and materials from the fall of '61 on; he wouldn't have had to worry about the missiles, the next fall .