 It was the height of the Cold War between the Soviet bloc and the United States and its allies . The U.S. and allies fought back in the 1950s and 1960s .
 One of the most colorful world leaders of the 20th century, he always identified with the peasant . He was crude, unsophisticated, earthy, and brutal, as well as energetic, shrewd and determined .
 He really did hammer his shoe on the table at the U.N. when he disagreed with a speaker, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He exposed and ended some of the arbitrary cruelty of Stalin in order to unleash what he thought was the scientific prowess of socialism . But apart from launching the world's first satellite into space, he never found the magic technological fix for Russia's ills . Instead came dangerously close to war with
 His leadership of the Communist bloc in the Cold War was so dangerous he had to be removed by his subordinates . His leadership in the 1950s and '60s is so dangerous that he was removed from power by subordinates .
 Khrushchev liked to threaten and bully, often using ""brinkmanship"" ; Time Sept., 1961 . Khrushchevs used to use the term "Brinkmanship" to bully .
 Schooling 7 Over-thrown 8 We will bury you . Schooling is over-the-throwing and over-reperating . We will not bury you. Schooling was over-schooling .
 Born to a poor peasant family, he left school at 14 and followed his father to work in distant mines . He left school aged 14 to join his father in the mines .
 He was an ambitious working-class youth during an era of industrial growth, world war and civil war . He watched closely, met everyone of importance, and displayed organizational skills that moved him ahead .
 He played a major role in building the Moscow subway system . He helped starve the kulaks who owned a few acres . The subway system is still in use today .
 The Ukraine was a main theater of war and he was political commissar at the front 1941-45 . He was political commissar at the front of the Ukraine during the war .
 He returned to Stalin's side in Moscow in 1949 in charge of agriculture . Agriculture was always the most essential, yet ironically most backward, part of the Soviet economy .
 Khrushchev and premier Georgi Malenkov united their networks against Lavrenti Beria . After Stalin's death in 1953, the two leaders united against Beria's security chief .
 The defection of two of Beria's deputy ministers allowed Khrushchev and Malenkov to arrest Beria . Without these ministers, Beria no longer had control of Ministry of Interior troops or troops of the Kremlin Guard .
 By 1957, Khrushchev had shoved Malenkov aside and had consolidated his dictatorship . By 1957 he had consolidated the power of Russia .
 His technique was to replace half the regional party leaders with his own network of loyalists, which gave him the votes to win the Central Committee over the ""anti-party group"" of Malenkov, Vyacheslav Molotov, and Lazar Kaganovich .
 He lived with his wife Niva in an old restored mansion in the Lenin Hills . He lived in a restored restored mansion .
 Khrushchev denounced Stalin in 1956 in one of the most spectacular and revealing speeches in world history . The speech was one of world's most revealing moments in history .
 The audience was originally high officials--they knew bits and pieces of the horrible story of Stalin's crimes, but now for the first time saw the whole picture . The audience at the center of the show saw the full picture of the crimes of Stalin .
 The text of the speech was soon translated and publicized worldwide . Khrushchev's intent was to use it against his intent, but the text was soon published .
 The secrets were out; now everyone knew that Stalin era was built on deceit, disinformation, and false allegations up and down the line . Stalin era built on false allegations, false imprisonment and execution, says historian .
 Hundreds of thousands of loyal Russians had been shot as ""spies" to satisfy Stalin's paranoia . Hundreds of thousand loyal Russians were shot as 'spies' for their loyalty .
 By blaming his predecessor for all of Russia's ills Khrushchev bought time to reform the system . By blaming him for all the ills he bought time for reform in Russia .
 The speech became a tool at all levels for reformers to attack the old guard that was accused of complicity in Stalin's crimes . The speech was used by reformers as a tool for attacking the old guards .
 Khrushchev himself shared the guilt but purged himself by revealing it to the world . The former leader of the Soviet Union was assassinated in 1968 .
 He could terminate the worst features of the Gulag, stopping arbitrary executions, freeing half the 2. million prisoners and shortening the terms for the rest of the rest .
 Stalin's name was never mentioned, his image was never seen, and instead filling the media and the minds with the glorious heroics of the Great Patriotic War against Germany . Stalin's memory was erased by erasing him from history, filling the memory of him with the glory of the
 The personality cult that Stalin had built was totally dismantled and was never to be repeated . Only one statue of Stalin was permitted to survive, and that was in Stalin's remote birthplace in Georgia .
 Soviet citizens began following Western ideas and fashions in clothing . Tasting a little freedom for the first time ever, Soviet citizens followed Western ideas .
 Khrushchev shut down the ""cultural thaw"" that had begun . Realizing he had allowed too much freedom for Communism to survive, Khrrushchev closed the thaw . Realized he allowed too many freedom for Communist to survive .
 He closed magazines in Moscow that had started to honestly describe and analyze Soviet society . He closed the magazines in . Moscow . Magazine closed .
 Boris Pasternak, winner of the Nobel Prize in literature in 1958 for his novel, was ostracized as a Judas . His novel, "Doctor Zhivas," was published in 1958 .
 Hungarian uprising a year later had to be crushed by the Russian army . One unexpected result was the Hungarian uprising that had been crushed by Russian troops .
 The revelations were a devastating blow to international Communism worldwide, especially as intellectuals and artists discovered they had been duped into blind support for a monster . The revelations came from the Communist Party .
 The Chinese moved into the vacuum, idealizing Mao and setting up rival Communist parties in most countries . Mao was idealized by the Chinese and idealized Mao and set up rival parties .
 He had to preserve control of Eastern Europe--but persuasion failed and he sent in his army to suppress Hungary . He had been trying to keep Eastern Europe under control .
 He had to maintain the unity of the world Communist movement, which turned above all on relations with China, he said . Second, he had to keep the unity in the world .
 Despite massive amounts of aid to China, he failed and made his most important ally into his most implacable foe . He failed to stop China becoming an ally of the West .
 President Obama had to de-escalate tensions and reach equilibrium with the U.S. He had to reach equilibrium, he says, with the United States .
 He instead tried nuclear confrontation in 1962, leading to near disaster in 1962 . He drew back at the last second over Cuba . In 1962, he tried a nuclear confrontation, but drew back .
 The Soviets astonished the world by taking a clear lead over the United States for a few years . More successful was his quest for prestige which centered on the Space Race .
 Khrushchev made a personal visit to the United States in 1959 . He met with President Dwight D Eisenhower in Geneva in 1955 .
 He was impressed with the hybrid corn and disgusted with the shimmer and glitter of Hollywood .
 A summit planned for 1960 was canceled when an American U-2 spy plane, piloted by Francis Gary Powers, was shot down in 1960 and Powers was captured . A summit was canceled in 1960 after Powers' U.S. spy plane shot down .
 Khrushchev met with President Kennedy during Kennedy's first year in office at the Vienna Summit of 1961 . The two leaders met during the Vienna summit .
 There followed a series of firsts, demonstrating the superiority of the big Soviet launching missiles . The missiles could also be used to launch nuclear weapons .
 The image of Yuri Gagarin, who became in 1961 the first man to orbit the earth, was made a central theme in Soviet propaganda . It was used to encourage the young to contribute to the building of communism and enhance Khrushchev's legitimacy .
 Third World Khrushchev cooks up trouble for the West by turning up the heat . Seeing Kennedy's indecisiveness, he ordered the building of the Berlin Wall in 1962 to stop the exodus of talent .
 Emboldened, the Soviets expanded their subversion in weak nations, knowing that the U.S. containment policy would force the West to defend itself under the most adverse conditions, as selected by the Kremlin . Emboldent, the Soviet subverted in weak countries, knew that the
 Soviet interest in the Third World grew with the aim of weakening the United States . The Soviet Union wanted to weaken the U.S. with the help of Russia .
 The Kremlin tried to gain a foothold among the newly independent countries of sub-Saharan Africa . The Kremlin gave technical and educational assistance to such socialist countries as Guinea, Mali, and Ghana .
 Secret Kremlin documents show aid was part of a strategy to promote Communist foreign policies and undercut capitalism . The Soviets maintained that their efforts were strictly fraternal and were being made unconditionally .
 African leaders were more interested in an Africanization of their erstwhile colonial structures . They carefully sidestepped the ideological ramifications of the collaboration . African leaders, however, were not interested in ideological implications .
 The USSR refused to give Soviet teachers and professors privileged positions even in institutions built by the USSR, such as the Institut Polytechnique in Conakry, which consistently had more Western instructors .
 The Soviet instructors' proficiency and often their technical expertise lagged far behind those of their French and American counterparts .
 Khrushchev was ultimately more interested in peaceful coexistence and in pursuing a classic policy of regional power than in revolutionary strategy . The former Soviet leader was ultimately interested in peace and coexistence .
 Washington demanded their removal and through a naval blockade around the island . Stunned to discover the missiles, Washington demanded they be removed .
 Khrushchev seems not to have consulted his advisors, and was ready to use nuclear weapons to defend Cuba against invasion . He also planned to send four nuclear-armed submarines to Cuba .
 Anastas Mikoyan calmed the emotional Khrushchev and got him to avoid such provocative acts . Khrushchchev was the prime minister of the Soviet Union in 1956 .
 The U.S. agreed to take out missiles and nuclear weapons from Cuba . He eventually relented and won a public promise that the United States would never invade Cuba .
 He got the Americans to secretly remove their nuclear missiles from Turkey and Italy . He also got the U.S. to remove their missiles from Italy and Turkey .
 Second he should not have sent two contradictory messages in the space of 24 hours . Second he shouldn't have sent a contradictory message, he said .
 By "blinking" during the showdown over the quarantine, he undermined his standing with the United States and in the Kremlin, he said . Finally, by ""blinking"" during a showdown over a quarantine he undermined himself with the U.S. and the Kremlin .
 His recklessness troubled other Kremlin leaders, who saw the Cuban episode as a fiasco that was all Khrushchev's fault . Other Kremlin leaders saw the incident as an all-Russian-made fiasco . The Cuban crisis was a major embarrassment for the Soviet Union .
 A fragile détente began after the missile crisis was resolved that helped the two sides agree to the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963 . The two sides agreed to the nuclear test ban treaty in 1963.
 Khrushchev's political weakness after his Cuban fiasco was the main obstacle . Khruschev's weakness was his weakness after the Cuban fiasco, he says .
 Discord within the Communist world prevented action until efforts to mend the rift with China collapsed . It underscored the need for a successful agreement with the West, experts say .
 Once the treaty was signed, the two sides failed to build on their common accomplishment and got bogged down by political issues that divided them . The treaty was the first to be signed by the U.S. and South Korea . It was signed in 1953 .
 The opportunity for a deeper détente and a comprehensive test ban was lost because the Soviets had to seek to undermine capitalism in the west and Mao's challenge in the East . The chance for a denteente is lost because of the Soviet Union's need for a test ban .
 Khrushchev sent in Field Marshall Ivan Konev and the Soviet combat army to suppress the Hungarian revolt in 1956 . The Hungarian army refused to shoot on the crowds in Hungary .
 The fired into the apartment buildings, reducing them to rubble, entombing man, woman and child . He executed the Hungarian leader Imre Nagy and replaced him with a pro-Soviet puppet . The fired .
 The uprising in Hungary led to political crisis throughout Eastern Europe . The uprising seriously threatened the position of East Germany's Communist dictator Walter Ulbricht .
 Khrushchev needed a strong ally in East Germany to prevent an uprising . He was able to remain in power and to prevent a uprising because of his position .
 German intellectuals were unorganized, and citizens feared a world war as their radios blared warnings of an American invasion . In addition to the threat of an invasion, the Germans were also unorganized in their own country .
 Ulbricht's political survival was the key element in his political survival . Soviet support was likely to be key to his political success, according to the report .
 Khrushchev's denunciation of Stalin allowed Poland to move from Stalinist rule to a more moderate regime in a relatively nonviolent manner . The Polish government was a relatively moderate regime .
 Khrushchev's secret speech intensified tensions between Communist reformers and Stalinists as well as the population's disaffection with the Stalinist regime, caused by its interference in personal freedom and unlawful imprisonments .
 He sent in the best technicians and the latest equipment, and helped China design its own nuclear weapons . He also helped design the country's own nuclear arms . The former president of China's first state-run state of state-sanctioned state of war in China .
 Khrushchev swung to the opposite extreme, suddenly withdrawing all Soviet technicians and canceling works in progress . Then he withdrew Soviet technicians, canceling all Soviet work in progress, he said . The Soviet Union was in the midst of a crisis in the 1950s and 1960s .
 The issue however is deeper than the foolish diplomacy of two rival dictators . The issue is not only about the silly diplomacy of the two dictators .
 China resented the upstart Russians who flaunted their greater wealth and more powerful weapons . China was bigger, older, more cultured and more cultured . Russia was bigger and older than China and resented its upstart rivals .
 Relations drastically worsened from Khrushchev's September 1959 visit to Beijing through the breakdown of compromise in October 1961 . Relations between Russia and China drastically worsened between 1959 and 1961 .
 Each party sought to appeal to the world as the legitimate party of proletarian internationalism . But China appealed more to the younger, more violent anti-capitalist fanatics .
 Specific areas of disagreement included the refusal to support China in its border conflict with India, which was becoming an ally .
 Beijing worried about of Moscow's willingness to talk disarmament with the United States, with the possible threat of a Soviet-American alliance against China . Beijing also worried about the possibility of a possible alliance with Russia .
 Mao had aggressive plans for advancing Marxist-Leninist goals in Asia, Africa, and Latin America . Conflict with Soviet agents in those places was inevitable . Mao's plans for those places were aggressive .
 Pro-Moscow and pro-Beijing factions emerged in most Communist parties in 1960s . After 1960s, pro-Moscow groups emerged in Communist parties and sharply weakened them .
 Khrushchev's years of power were marked by strong economic growth, especially in industry . Agriculture lagged behind in Russia .
 This was the setting fro the growing confidence in the long-term success of scientific socialism, buttressed by public opinion . Public opinion was grateful for the slowly rising standard higher standard of living after so many decades of privation .
 The growth rate was slowing down by 1964, but the Soviets--who lacked accurate statistical measures of their own economy, did not yet realize the sclerosis that was to emerge after Khrushchev was forced into retirement .
 The result was a doubling in a year of farm incomes, as peasants toasted to Malenkov's health with local moonshine . The result of the health crisis was a double in farm incomes .
 Khrushchev had to do even better for the peasants, while upgrading the volume and quality of food for the cities . He had to also upgrade the volume of food and quality for the city .
 Khrushchev's favorite project was to till the virgin and long-fallow lands of Kazakhstan and nearby Soviet republics in order to increase the USSR's agricultural production, especially of grain . The virgin lands were used to increase Soviet agricultural production .
 Despite his belief that scientific socialism could overcome all obstacles, the task proved far more immense and complex than the authorities had anticipated . The results were mostly failures, although some local achievements were attained .
 The space industry demonstrated that modern management could be applied in Russia, it was much applauded but seldom emulated . Russia's space industry showed modern management can be applied to Russia .
 From the 1950s to the 1990s, there was a continuation of the old Soviet pattern of inner-circle intrigues . Instead of adopting modern principles of management as practiced in other industrialized countries, the Soviet Union continued to adopt old Soviet patterns of bureaucracy .
 The military carved out its own industrial sector, where productivity was somewhat higher . The industrial sector was largely dominated by the military .
 Three generations squeezed into a couple rooms--parents, children, and a widowed mother . Parents, children and widowed mothers were often squeezed into rooms .
 Nixon boasted to Khrushchev of the superiority of American kitchens . A central feature of the new apartments was the kitchen . Families no longer had to eat in communal settings .
 The Soviet kitchen was presented as a model of efficiency where one could find a bit of privacy . The kitchen is presented as an example of efficiency .
 The kitchen gained ideological importance and was viewed as a central element of the grand program of socialist modernization . The kitchen was seen as proof of the triumph of socialism through its superior living standards .
 Women were to play a special role, and a number of programs and courses offered them training in home economics . Home economics was the focus of home economics in the 1930s .
 Media portrayed this penetration of technology into everyday life as a key element of socialist modernity . The new kitchen was, above all, to be efficient, and the media portrayed this .
 In practice, women found that the promised benefits did not materialize . American Vice President Richard Nixon came to Moscow in 1959 and in his internationally publicized ""kitchen debate" with Khrushchev demonstrated how much superior were American kitchens .
 Khrushchev was no friend of the Orthodox Church, and increased persecution in the late 1950s . He identified it with old-fashioned superstitions that would slow his schemes for the rapid modernization of agriculture .
 An antireligious campaign was launched in the second half of the 1950s . It was used to fight not just priests and churches but also to identify and track and isolate all Christians .
 Khrushchev wanted to reach the very essence of the people's religiousness in order to ""cure"" them . The government wanted to "cure" the religiousness of the Soviet Union .
 More often, ways were found in which religion and the Soviet system could coexist . In Soviet times, religion and religion were found to be able to coexist peacefully .
 Outward repression like the closing of churches and the prohibition of pilgrimages occurred but not enough to attain the primary goal of replacing the religious person in rural Russia with the Soviet person . The Soviet state wanted to replace religious people with a Soviet person, according to the historian .
 He predicted the end of Christianity in the Soviet Union . He boasted that the last Christian would be paraded on Soviet television within a few years . The last Christian will be seen on Soviet TV within the years .
 Christianity outlasted Khrushchev, and even outlived Communism in Russia . In fact, Christianity outlived the Communist Party in the Soviet Union .
 Khrushchev had little success in reforming the archaic educational system . Schooling Khrushvic was a struggle to reform the Soviet Union's education system . Khushchev was the prime minister of Soviet Russia in the 1960s .
 He tried to remove the worst aspects of Stalinism, promote a degree of freer exchange of opinions, grant schools more autonomy . He also tried to make curricula of primary and secondary schools more relevant to the needs of the expanding and developing Soviet economy .
 Some wished to maintain the Stalinist system, believing that the USSR needed firm and unwavering central authority and automatic obedience, rather than students who could think for themselves . Some believed that the Soviet system needed firm, unwavering, central authority .
 Old fashioned pedagogs used to relentless drill and memorization realized they were ill fitted to adapt to the changes . The changes have been made to a new generation of pedagogy .
 Some educators supported the changes, but fearfully wondered whether any future change of leadership might lead to denunciation of Khrushchev's reforms . Those who had accepted the reforms were censured .
 The reforms were put together hastily, were implemented fitfully and capriciously, and failed fundamentally to change Soviet educational results . The reforms failed to fundamentally change the Soviet educational system .
 Kremlin leaders were fed up with Khrushchev's irascible and self-contradictory behavior . Top officials complained he no longer consulted with them . Khrushchevitch was overthrown in 1964 .
 Khrushchev knew he was tired out and talked of retirement, but there was no orderly way to change rulers . He knew he wanted to be a leader, but was tired of being a dictator .
 He failed to realize he had lost support among workers, farmers and the intelligentsia, he says .
 None of the grandiose socialist reforms he had promised so often were working out . Even the space program had fallen behind the Americans. Even the Soviet Union's space program .
 China is now an enemy and building alternative Communist parties across the world reforms . China was now an ally of the West and building alternatives to the Communist Party in the world .
 Top conspirators included Leonid Brezhnev, Alexei Kosygin, Nikolai Podgorny, Mikhail Suslov . They acted in a bloodless coup to remove Khrushchev from government and party positions in October 1964 .
 Khrushchev then quietly lived out the remainder of his life under the watch of the KGB until his death in 1971 . The former Soviet leader died in 1971 at the age of 65 .
 He actually believed that it was possible to overtake the United States in the production of meat, butter and milk . He believed that the U.S. could overtake them in meat and butter .
 Urbanization brought millions of peasants from jobs of low productivity on the farm to jobs of much better productivity in the cities . The result was a temporary boost in very high growth rates that leveled off after so may people had quit the farms that food shortages loomed .
 Khrushchev was a true believer in Communism; his son Sergei is now a U.S. citizen . His son is now an American citizen .
 As William Taubman has asked, Foreword, many questions remain unanswered . Foreword: Many questions still remain unanswered. Foreword is open to the public .
 Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War excerpt and text search Florinsky, Michael T McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Russia and the Soviet Union online edition .
 Khrushchev, Castro, and Kennedy, 1958-1964 online edition online edition . Fursenko, Aleksandr, and Timothy Naftali. The book was published in 1964 . It is published in the online edition of this edition .
 The Khrushchev Era 1953-1964 is excerpted from Vojtech and Malcolm Byrne . Mastny and Byrne are the authors of the book, "Krushchev era 1953-64"
 An Inside History of the Warsaw Pact, 1955-1991 online edition, is published by William Taubman, William. The Warsaw Pact was formed in the early 1950s .
 Khrushchev, Nikita. The Man and His Era , 896pp; outstanding, balanced biography; Pulitzer prize; the best place to start . Von Bencke, Matthew J The Politics of Space: A History of U.S.-Soviet/Russian Competition and Cooperation in