 President Obama received criticism from domestic political opponents . He has been criticized for his actions in the U.S. and without receiving criticism .
 Kennedy made few televised appearances throughout his presidency . Kennedy was president of the United States in 1964 .
 He controlled the flow of information during the crisis not only to prevent nuclear war, but also to create a lasting legacy . Page 11: “So he controlled . flow of . information during . the crisis, “to prevent nuclear . war,” he said .
 White House interview access to Kennedy would be revoked . Reporters would not be allowed to interview about Kennedy or any of his policies .
 The Cuban exiles were easy targets for Castro’s air force, and the CIA reported to Allen Dulles on April 17, 1961 that the operation was hopeless . The CIA reported the operation to Dulles .
 The president circulated his condemnation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff among his journalist friends . The president, himself, circulated the condemnation among his journalists friends .
 The Bay of Pigs, Missile Crisis, and Covert War Against Castro,” in Kennedy’s Quest for Victory, Page 20 19 . Kennedy would proceed with caution, and he would wait until the time was right to disclose information about the operation .
 21 cries for military intervention in Cuba were growing louder and louder . The Cuban government was growing impatient for intervention . It was the first time the U.S. government was allowed to enter Cuba .
 Suppression or editing of the news is not a new practice in American history . Most American presidents have managed the news in some form .
 29 failed invasion to be more careful about the information that they made public . Page 30: "They should have been more careful" Page 29: "We are not going to be able to do this again. We are going to have to be careful"
 30 missiles in Cuba because the president’s speech “confirmed” Soviet intentions . 30 missiles were launched because of the president's speech .
 Despite Khrushchev’s belief that the U.S. planned to invade Cuba, the American public had no knowledge of Operation Mongoose . The American public did not know of the secret operation .
 During this period, there was inadequate infrastructure in place for journalists to check the facts purported by the Kennedy administration . Page 33 32 during this period .
 Group considered air strike, invasion, or blockade in response to Khrushchev . Group was divided between a blockade and an air strike . Group divided between air strike and a blockade .
 Page 37 36 of the CIA, to educate Krock about how quickly missile sites can be set up . Page 37 of CIA’s CIA, Krock explains how quickly missiles can be built .
 The Scali-Feklisov meeting may have prepared the Kremlin to accept a diplomatic solution . The meetings have been the primary factor to resolve the crisis .
 ExComm committee members dismissed by ExComm members as a pacifist strategy . Committee continued to plan military strategies to forcibly remove missiles .
 Page 49 48 emphasize how “calm and controlled” Kennedy acted throughout the duration of the crisis . This is an inaccurate picture of how the deliberations proceeded .
 Sorensen, Kennedy, 207.163, is the name of the president of the United States . Kennedy was elected to the White House in 2008 . Kennedy died of a heart attack in 2009 .
 After his assassination in 1963, he became almost a martyr to the American people . John F Kennedy succeeded in building a legacy of savior, and after his assassination he became a martyr .
 He learned that he could use the press to shape the way that he would be remembered in history .
 Norris, John G and Carroll Kilpatrick. The Washington Post . The Washington Times.com .