 John Kennedy: "We are all mortal. We are all mortals" Kennedy was speaking at the U.S. Academy of Science in 1963 .
 If somebody wants to shoot me from a window with a rifle, nobody can stop it, so why worry about it? — John F. KENNEDY, FORT WORTH, TEXAS, on the morning of November 22, 1963 .
 I did know—but I should have guessed that it would be too much to ask to grow old with and see our children grow up together . I did, but I shouldn't have guessed too much: "I did know"
 JFK would have preferred to be a man when he was a man . He is now a legend when he is a legend, when he would have rather been a woman .
 Prologue begins at the end of the prologue of the novel . The novel is set in New York, New York .
 The president’s casket at the United States Capitol at the U.S. Capitol . Jacqueline Kennedy and children at the Capitol . The funeral procession to St. John Paul Kennedy is expected to take place in Washington .
 It is hard to believe that it happened fifty years ago . The Warren Commission presented its Report to President Johnson .
 Even in the current generation, it remains a great dividing line in American history . "The Civil War" is still an important part of American history, even today .
 It was the greatest national trauma since the assassination of Abraham Lincoln at the end of the Civil War in April 1865 . The assassination of Lincoln in 1865 was the nation's greatest trauma .
 Those who were alive in the fall of 1963 and were old enough then to remember it today shudder at the mere mention of the date . Those who are old enough to remember the date of the day shudder .
 At once they will tell you where they were and what they were doing when they heard the news . They will also tell you how they reacted to hearing the news of the earthquake .
 This charismatic leader of his people is struck down at the height of his power and fame . He leaves behind a young widow to conjure his legend, leaving behind his wife .
 "It is a tale filled with irony and foreshadowing, with heroes and monsters," says author . It is "filled with irony, foreshadowed and filled with characters and monsters"
 It seeks to recapture how Americans lived through this tragedy and to resurrect the mood and emotions of those unforgettable days between President John F Kennedy’s murder and his funeral .
 "To those of you who remember, I hope this book does justice to your memories," she says . "I hope this is justice to those who remember," she writes .
 To those who do not and who know—or think they know—the story only through retellings in books or films, I hope this book evokes the mood, the loss, and the emotional truth of the fall of 1963 .
 Our misguided modern-day obsession with exotic, multiple, and contradictory conspiracy theories has caused us to lose the emotional connection to the events of November 1963 . We are losing an emotional connection with the events, writes CNN's John Sutter .
 This is not meant to be a complete history of the Kennedy assassination, if such a book could ever even be written . This is meant to not be a full history .
 CNN.com will not endorse or rebut any complicated webs of conspiracies . Nor does it travel down the rabbit hole to endorse any of those complicated web-conspiracies .
 This book is no more than a modest attempt to tell a story, to restore the balance, to travel back in time to the days before it happened, and to return to the day when we did not know what would happen next . The book is an attempt to restore a story that
 John Kennedy’s days ended on the sunny afternoon of a brilliant fall day in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963 . John Kennedy was assassinated by a Democratic Senator in 1963 .
 Georgetown, in the northwest section of Washington, D.C., is one of the most prestigious neighborhoods in the nation's capital . Georgetown is a historic neighborhood of Georgetown, Washington, DC .
 Founded as a commercial trading hub along the banks of the Potomac River before the American Revolution, it boasts the oldest home in Washington, along with many other brick town houses .
 Over the past two centuries, many distinguished Americans have called Georgetown home . Georgetown has been home to many of the world's most famous people .
 No public figure has been more connected to the neighborhood than John F Kennedy, the thirty-fifth president of the United States .
 He lived in several homes there beginning in 1946, during the time when he gained national recognition as a United States congressman and senator . In November 1960, he was elected president of the United States .
 The circa-1811 three-story Federal-era brick town house at 3307 N Street NW, his last home in Georgetown, served as a nerve center . Kennedy hired staff and planned for his forthcoming administration, which he called the New Frontier .
 Even before the election, the photographers Mark Shaw and Jacques Lowe had already made the house an iconic symbol of the Kennedy style .
 For two and a half months, the lights inside the house burned late as the president-elect gathered his closest advisers around him . For two-and-a-half months, he gathered close friends and family around him.
 They were there whenever he opened the front door, stood on the top step, and walked down to the public sidewalk to announce the appointment of a new person to his administration . They were also there when he announced the appointment .
 On January 19, the night before his inauguration, a heavy snowstorm paralyzed the nation’s capital . The storm paralyzed Washington, D.C. on January 19 .
 The glow from the pair of clear glass and black metal lamps flanking John Kennedy’s front door made the crystals layering the surface of the deep snow twinkle in the night .
 The Democratic Gala is scheduled for 8:45 p.m. at the National Guard Armory . The Kennedys are expected to attend the Democratic Party .
 Jacqueline Kennedy wore a shimmering white satin floor-length gown that mirrored the soft, thick snowy carpet that covered the capital .
 The next morning, John and Jacqueline Kennedy left their town house for the last time and embarked on a journey he would not complete, from which he would never return . The next day, the couple left their home for the first time in their final days .
 He had chosen his victim, scouted the location, written detailed notes in his journal, drawn maps and diagrams, even photographed the building . He had scouted his victim's location, drawn detailed notes and drawn maps .
 By the time he was ready to do it, his notebook bulged with all the information needed to carry out a successful political murder . It includes surveillance photos, ideas on where to hide the rifle before the attack .
 After the shooting, he would conceal his rifle in a hiding place near the tracks and then flee on foot . He would then hide his rifle and flee the tracks on foot, police say .
 The notebook contained all the vital information necessary to make a clean getaway on public transportation . It contained the location of bus stops in the vicinity and the exact times that the buses would make those stops .
 He would have to kill his victim, run away, hide the rifle, and arrive at the bus stop just before the bus approached . He would then have to run away and hide the gun .
 It would be too risky to stand at a corner for several minutes, waiting for the next bus . It's too dangerous to stand on a corner at a bus stop, says the driver .
 He would be the first assassin in American history to try to escape the scene of the crime on a city bus . The assassin would be first assassin to attempt to flee the scene on a bus .
 He figured the police would never suspect or even look for an unarmed passenger riding a bus . He said he figured police wouldn't look for him on the bus . Police say they would never look for or suspect the unarmed passenger .
 Aides or bodyguards could not protect the man from a clean shot with a rifle . The man was shot by a single shot from a rifle in the head .
 The murder was sure to cause a national sensation and create headline news . The murder is sure to create headlines throughout the U.S.
 If he could just get the target in his telescopic sight, it should work, he would be able to shoot .
 At first, he had thought he might use a pistol, the assassin’s traditional weapon of choice for slaying an American politician . The assassin's traditional weapon was a pistol .
 The Smith & Wesson .38 special was a double-action, six-shot revolver with a five-inch barrel cut down to a stubby two and a quarter inches . The revolver was purchased in January 1963 .
 The shortened barrel made the weapon easier to conceal in a pocket or a shoulder holster . The weapon's shortened barrel also made it easier to carry in the pocket or shoulder holster.
 Hidell will owe the balance of the purchase price upon delivery . Hidell would owe the rest of the payment to Hidell, and he would then have to pay for the purchase .Hidell would then be able to claim the balance back on the sale of Hidell .
 You had to get close to the victim to use it, and his target was a combat veteran who had served in the military . The victim had to be close to him to use the weapon .
 Six weeks later, on March 12, 1963, he mailed a postal money order to Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago and, under a false name, ordered an Italian, World War II military surplus 6.5mm Mannlicher-Carcano bolt-action rifle .
 By coincidence, the revolver and the rifle both arrived in Dallas on March 25, 1963 . The revolver and rifle arrived on the same day .
 Her husband told her a woman like her was incapable of understanding why a man like him needed to own a rifle . Her husband said she didn't understand why he needed to have a rifle, she said .
 A few days later, he had her take photographs of him in their backyard brandishing his new rifle and wearing a pistol on his belt . He had her photograph taken in the backyard of their backyard . The couple had been married for more than 20 years .
 She had never taken a photograph, and he had to show her how to operate his cheap Imperial Reflex camera . She had to learn how to take a photograph .
 Lee Harvey Oswald posed with his rifle, pistol, and left-wing newspapers . Oswald was the leader of the Army of the Second World in the late 1940s .
 He held two newspapers in his hand while she took the photographs . He held copies of the Worker and the Militant journals .
 She could not understand why he would call attention to himself that way . She said she was shocked by the attention he received .
 After developing photographic prints, he gave one to his wife and said that she should keep it for their infant daughter, June . For privacy he did the work himself at the printing company where he worked .
 She hoped that he was just ‘playing around’ and that this was just another example of her husband’s immaturity, she said .
 He ordered her to keep out of his private room, a little home office he'd set up in their new apartment . He had set up a private office in his new apartment, he said . He also ordered her out of the room .
 For a man who had shared a bed with his mother until he was 10 or 11 years old, the nook represented the privacy and independence he craved . The nook, no matter how modest, represents the privacy he craves, he said .
 She knew he meant it—he was unpredictable and violent man who had beaten her up before . She knew that he was a violent and unpredictable man who'd beaten her .
 He was twenty-23 years old, she was 20-21, and they had been husband and wife for only two years . He and his wife had been married for two years, but he and her died in a car crash .
 He was not the same man she had met and married in her native Russia . But he was the man she married in the country .
 When he returned and found that he could not get in, he smashed a glass panel, reached in, and unlocked the door from inside . He smashed the glass panel and reached into the door to unlock it .
 She was furious and wanted him to know he had not beaten the pride out of her . She wanted him know he hadn't beaten her .
 After he got home from work, he blew his top when he discovered that she had prepared the beans and rice together in the same pot .
 Alek was one of the names she called him when they had lived in Russia . That name, along with Alek, is one of several names she calls him . Alek and Alek were the names of her husband when they were in Russia together .
 It was not his fault, he was suggesting, that he could not control his temper . It was suggested, he said, that it wasn't his fault that he couldn't control it .
 He threatened to beat her if she ever intruded into his tiny private room . Now, in their new apartment, he had promised to never hit her again . He had promised her he would never hit again .
 Marine Corps had taught him all he needed to know about that, he says . His training in the U.S. Marine Corps taught him that .
 On one occasion, she had discovered in their apartment photographs of a strange house . On another occasion she had found photographs of strange houses .
 On April 1, he was fired from his current one at the Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall printing company .
 He had hurried through assignments, made careless mistakes, and had to redo too many jobs, he said . He said: "I had made too many mistakes, had to do too many redo jobs"
 He was brusque with coworkers, refusing to sit with them at lunch and often shouldering them aside in the darkroom . He refused to sit at lunch with colleagues at lunch . He often shouldered colleagues aside in darkrooms .
 He had already gotten what he wanted: He had used the office equipment to make himself fake identification cards . He had developed prints of the photographs of him posing with his rifle .
 It was as though his mind was distracted by something more important than holding a job . It was like he was distracted from holding the job, he said .
 Within the next four days, he would cross the line from malcontent to madman . "Within four days" he would become a madman, his life would change dramatically .
 On the morning of Wednesday, April 10, he put on a gray suit and white shirt . It's the kind of outfit a man looking for a job might wear .
 After waiting a week and a half to tell her, he admitted to his wife that he had been fired . After waiting for a week, he told her he was fired from his job .
 He did not reveal that he had been let go for poor performance and a bad attitude . He said he was let go because he had a 'bad attitude'
 He offered a grander excuse that shifted the blame from himself to others . He offered to blame himself for the loss of his job .
 She knew the government had had an ongoing interest in them since they had moved from Russia to the U.S. She said she knew government had been interested in them for years .
 When he left the house that morning, his wife assumed he would spend all day looking for work . His wife thought he would be spending all day searching for work, but he never showed up .
 Whenever he needed a job, it was his habit to buy a newspaper, scour the want ads for leads, and walk the streets from employer to employer . He bought a newspaper and scoured the ads in search of leads .
 He had only one appointment to keep, and he was not due there for another ten or twelve hours . He was due to be in the office at the end of the day .
 He was in no hurry to reach his destination, the house at 4011 Turtle Creek Boulevard . The house is in one of the better neighborhoods in town . It's in a good neighborhood .
 Too many people, too many potential witnesses, too great a chance that the police might hunt him down . Too many of the people he was killed are people who have never seen him .
 He went to the spot where he had secreted his rifle a few days earlier . He then went back to the place where he'd hidden his rifle from the site .
 "Once again, he placed the residence under surveillance, just as he had done several times before on his practice missions," he said . The residence was under surveillance .
 He was sure his victim was somewhere inside that house on Turtle Creek Boulevard . And he was sure that he had killed his victim in that house .
 The man he had marked for death had been in command of thousands of American soldiers, but tonight they could not protect him . He had marked the man for death . The man had been commanding thousands of Americans .
 At this moment, President John F Kennedy was in the White House, 1,200 miles away . At this time, JFK was in Washington, D.C. and in New York .
 The day before, in a 3:00 PM. televised ceremony in the flower garden, he had conferred honorary American citizenship upon Winston Churchill . Churchill had been awarded the title of U.S. citizenship .
 It was the first time such an honor had been given to a foreign statesman . The honour was given to foreign statesmen .
 Sir Winston, too frail to travel to the United States, watched the event on television at his home in London, via a live satellite broadcast .
 Earlier this day, Kennedy had addressed a gathering of economics students from abroad . He had proposed the creation of a National Service Corps .
 He would retire to bed on the second floor in the mansion’s residence . Soon, he would retire .
 Lee Harvey Oswald did not care where the president of the United States was . Oswald was not interested in the president, but he was determined to carry out the assassination . Oswald shot President Kennedy Kennedy in the head in September 1963 .
 Oswald wanted to kill Major General Edwin A Walker, U.S. Army . Walker was less than forty yards away from him when he was killed .
 Walker received orders from President Eisenhower in 1957 to quell civil disturbances during the desegregation of Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas . Walker was a decorated World War II, Korean War combat officer and West Point graduate .
 Walker thought it was wrong to use the U.S. Army to desegregate the South against its will . Walker did a superb job of protecting the black students .
 He became obsessed with the idea that Communists had infiltrated the U.S. government . He later accused Harry Truman and Eleanor Roosevelt of being “pink”—the hot-button word for communist sympathizers .
 President Kennedy relieved him from command, and Walker resigned his commission . Walker was relieved of command by President Kennedy .
 He became a political activist, giving provocative speeches throughout the nation . He became an activist and became a national figure .
 Walker was charged with insurrection and the violation of several federal laws . Attorney General Kennedy tried to commit the general to a mental institution . Walker was tried to be committed to mental hospital .
 Edwin Walker gave a speech that seemed to advocate that the U.S. invade Cuba and assassinate Fidel Castro . Walker was in the news again in February 1963, when he gave the speech . Walker's speech was the talk of the assassination of Castro .
 His justifications for the assassination came straight out of the pages of the Worker . He said: 'His justifications came straight from the pages . He also said that he would have been happy to be assassinated .
 Oswald was attempting to kill Walker, JFK’s bitterest political enemies . Walker was a longtime ally of the president . Oswald shot Walker in the head with a bullet to the head .
 Lee spotted him, clear as day in a brightly lit room, sitting at a desk while he worked on his federal income-tax return . Lee spotted the man sitting in the room while he was working on his tax return . He said the man was "clear as day" in a
 Oswald steadied his shooting stance, verified the target in his scope, and squeezed the trigger . Oswald stood in his steadied stance and verified his target in the scope .
 She decided to search their apartment for some clue about where might have gone . She searched the apartment for clues as to where they might have disappeared .
 Oswald had discouraged her from learning the language . To keep her dependent on him, Oswald had encouraged her to learn the language. Oswald had kept her dependent .
 The ninth point reminded Marina that “we have friends here,” implying that a small circle of Russian-born émigrés living in Dallas would help take care of her . Marina: “We have friends in Dallas.”
 Marina got to the eleventh point and her husband’s final, bizarre instruction, she said . Marina said: “I'm going to go to the end of the day. I'm not going to be able to get to the top of the list.” Marina
 Lee's handwritten instructions advise Marina what to do in case Lee vanished or was killed or arrested . Note gave no hint about awful things he had planned to do that night .
 The bullet, traveling at 1,700 or 1,800 feet per second, missed Walker’s head by less than an inch . Walker was hit by a bullet traveling at about a mile per second . The bullet missed Walker's head by just one inch .
 The bullet nicked part of the wood window frame, which altered its flight path just enough to save the general’s life . But on its way into the house, the bullet went through the window and hit the general .
 Walker assumed kids tossed fireworks through an open window missing its screen . Walker assumed that kids had tossed the fireworks through the window . Walker was wrong .
 It did not take the general long to figure out that somebody had shot at him, he said . The general was shot in the head .
 Oswald could have operated the bolt, ejected the empty brass cartridge, chambered a fresh round, and fired again . Oswald could've operated the . bolt, ejected the . empty brass . cartridge, then fired again, according to CNN.com .
 Either he convinced himself he had killed the general—how could he miss at that range?—or he was too skittish to stand his ground and fire a second round . The general was either too scared or too afraid to stand down and fire again .
 Walker did not duck for cover, cower on the floor, and hide, when he realized he had been fired upon . Walker said he was not afraid to duck and cower, but he did not hide . Walker was shot in the head by police officers in the early hours of
 Walker searched the area but found no one . Walker searched for no one in the alleyway . Walker says he went to the alley to look for the suspect .
 If Oswald had lingered in the area, Walker might have caught him in the open and shot him to death . Walker: "If Oswald lingered, hoping to fire multiple shots, Walker would have shot him dead"
 Lee’s legs increased the distance between him and the pursuing general . Lee's legs increased to increase the distance from him and General Lee .
 Oswald hid his rifle in the same spot where he had concealed it prior to the assassination attempt . Oswald fled into the night and hid his gun in the area where he hid it . Oswald hid the rifle in a spot where it had been concealed .
 He didn’t want to get caught with the weapon in his possession on the way home . The suspect says he didn't want to be caught with it on his way home from jail .
 In a few days, when it was safe, he planned to go back and retrieve the rifle from its hiding place . He planned to retrieve the weapon from his hiding place in the next few days . In the past, he said he would go back to find the rifle .
 At this moment, after months of careful planning, he did not know whether he had succeeded or failed in killing Edwin Walker . "I don't know whether I have succeeded or fail in killing," he says .
 Marina OSWALD waited for Lee to come home—ten thirty, eleven, eleven thirty . Lee's wife waited for him to return home .
 He told Marina he had run “several kilometers” and then caught a bus home . He said he ran several kilometers before catching a taxi home .
 To avoid being spotted by eyewitnesses, he decided not to stand at a bus stop too close to Walker’s house . Walker decided to stand near the bus stop to avoid being seen by onlookers .
 Oswald switched on the radio after returning to his apartment, Oswald says . Oswald had returned from his hotel room to the White House, where he was killed . Oswald was killed in the September 4, 1945, assassination .
 He listened, hoping to hear a news flash about the attack and confirmation that the general was dead . The general was killed in the attack on Friday .
 The assassination of Edwin Walker was sure to make the news . Walker was a well-known general in the British Army . Walker's assassination was the first of his kind kind of assassination .
 Walker’s would-be assassin had fled by automobile, the newspaper suggested . Walker was shot by a police officer at the scene of the shooting . Walker is believed to have been killed by a car bomb .
 A 14-year-old neighbor boy said he saw two suspicious cars race away from the scene of the assassination attempt . The boy says he saw a driver only and a second car with several occupants .
 Walker: "There are plenty of people on the other side" Walker says he has no idea who shot at him . Walker says, "There were plenty of folks on the side"
 This anticommunist crusader would have been humiliated to have been slain by a malcontent ex-U.S. Marine who defected to the Soviet Union . Karl Marx was a disciple of Karl Marx .
 How ironic it would have been for this arch foe of overreaching government authority to be murdered while in the act of calculating his federal income tax .
 The wood frames of both the mesh screen and glass window saved Walker's life . It was the wood frames that saved Walker from drowning .
 If someone had killed Hitler, it would have saved many lives, he said . He added that if Hitler had been killed, he could have saved lives .
 Oswald admitted that he had been stalking Walker and planning his assassination for two months, even before he ordered the rifle . Oswald admitted he had stalked Walker and planned to kill him .
 Lee Oswald desired to possess a souvenir of his crime . Lee Oswald was a compulsive criminal who wanted to keep his crime souvenir .
 In the future, whenever he fondled the cherished notebook, he could relive the thrilling assassination attempt . "In the future," he could fondly fondly recall the attempt to kill himself, the author says .
 Marina watched him tear out each page one by one, crumple it, and light it on fire with a match . Marina watched as he crumpled the pages and set them alight . Marina said: "I don't know what I'm going to do with this."
 He dropped each crumpled, burning page into the toilet and flushed away his murder plans . Marina continued to chastise her husband .
 She begged Lee to promise that he would not make another attempt on Walker’s life . She begged him to promise not to kill Walker .
 Oswald was guilty of attempted murder, but Marina was afraid to report him to the authorities . Oswald was found guilty of attempting to murder his wife, Marina, in 1963 . Marina died of her injuries in a car crash at the hands of her husband .
 If he were arrested, tried, and sentenced to prison, it would destroy their family . "It would destroy [his family] if he were tried, he said . It would destroy them," he added .
 She was afraid the government would also punish her or deport her to Russia . She said she was afraid she would also be punished or deported to Russia.
 Family members of criminals were often held responsible for the offenses of their relatives . In the Soviet Union, the family of a criminal were often responsible for their relatives' crimes .
 Marina decided to keep Lee’s secret not only to protect him but to safeguard her daughter and their life in the United States . Marina decided not to reveal Lee's secret to her daughter .
 Oswalds received unexpected visitors the night before Easter . The Oswalds were visited by a family member three days after the shooting . Oswalds' home was in New York City on April 13 .
 George was an intelligent, well-educated, and exotic figure on the Dallas social scene . George was acquainted with the local Russian émigré circle and had befriended Marina and Lee .
 Oswald enjoyed having political discussions with the fifty-two-year-old bon vivant and world traveler . Oswald enjoyed talking to Oswald about politics .
 People who knew them both could not understand the connection between the sophisticated European with aristocratic origins and the young, lower-class member of the working poor .
 The Oswalds invited the de Mohrenschildts in, and both couples sat down . Both couples were invited to sit down for the first time .
 The assassination attempt fascinated George, and he wanted to talk about it . "The assassination attempt fascinates George," he said. "It was a very interesting experience," he added .
 Oswald decided to follow Marina’s advice to leave Texas and move to New Orleans . Shortly after that, Oswald followed Marina's advice to move out of Texas .
 Marina had snapped photos of Lee in their backyard with his rifle and pistol . It was a print of one of the photos Marina had taken of Lee with his pistol and rifle . Marina's husband was a Marine Marine Corps veteran .
 Perhaps it was a humorous, mocking reference to George’s joke that it was too bad Lee had missed General Walker . Lee was killed in the Battle of the Plains in 1864 .
 General Walker’s assassination was a psychological turning point . OSWALD’S ATTEMPTED asSassination of General Walker was a_ psychological turning . point .
 He had joined the Marine Corps in peacetime and had never fought in a war . He joined the Navy in the 1960s and has never been involved in any of the wars .
 He missed his target, but planning and executing the sniper attack had given him immense satisfaction . Yes, he had missed his . target .
 The failure of the police to catch Lee emboldened him and enhanced his smug attitude of superiority . Lee had botched his self-assigned mission, but the failure to catch him emboldened his arrogance . Lee's smug attitude was enhanced by the police's failure to capture him .
 He did not know it now in late April 1963, but in a little more than seven months, he would find another human target . In April 1963 he would be in the midst of an assassination attempt .
 He enjoyed the social scene and had been known for his associations with a number of attractive women . He enjoyed social life and was known for associations with women .
 In that era, it was considered odd, especially for a politician, to be unmarried . But in that era it was thought odd—especially for politician—to be unmarried. It's considered odd for politicians to be married .
 In May 1951, Charlie Bartlett and his wife, Martha, hosted a dinner party at their Georgetown home and invited their friend Congressman Kennedy . Charlie and Martha Bartlett invited Kennedy to the party, which was held at their home .
 Jacqueline Lee Bouvier was a stylish, educated, and well-bred twenty-one-year-old debutante . She had been raised to assume a place among the wealthy American elite . Jacqueline was also a debutante who had, like him, been raised in New York
 She liked his handsome features, wit, confidence, and devil-may-care attitude . She was impressed with his wit and confidence .
 He was drawn to her good looks and sophistication and was intrigued by her private and mysterious personality . He was fascinated by her personality .
 In September 1953, at the age of thirty-six, John Kennedy married Jacqueline Bouvier . John Kennedy was married to Jacqueline in September 1953 .
 Their wedding in Newport, Rhode Island, was the social event of the season . Their wedding was the first of the year .
 The actor's lifelong health problems began to haunt him once again . However, soon he was back in the spotlight again after a series of health problems .
 He had been plagued by painful back injuries in his youth, and an incident during the Second World War had exacerbated the problem . He had a painful back injury during his youth .
 Kennedy's boat, PT-109, was rammed and sliced in two by a Japanese warship on August 2, 1943 . Kennedy narrowly escaped death in the Pacific when he was attacked by the Japanese .
 Jack clenched in his teeth a strap attached to the man’s life jacket and towed him to a nearby island . Jack clenched his teeth as he pulled the man from the life jacket .
 He was given the last rites and almost died, but he struggled to live, and he survived . He almost died and survived .
 In January 1960, Kennedy declared himself a candidate for the Democratic nomination for president of the United States . Kennedy declared his candidacy in 1960 .
 He outmaneuvered his older and more experienced rivals, including Senator Lyndon Baines Johnson of Texas . He won the nomination in 1964 .
 The Republicans nominated former senator Richard Nixon of California . He had for the past seven years served as vice president of the United States under the popular president Dwight Eisenhower .
 Both had served as navy officers in the war, both had been elected to Congress in 1946, and then to the Senate . Both served in the U.S. Navy .
 There they worked cordially with each other, shared an interest in foreign affairs, and agreed on one of the great issues of the day . "The danger posed by Communism and the Soviet Union"
 John Kennedy’s family was rich, and he had enjoyed all the privileges that money could buy . He had a fine Harvard education, world travel, material possessions, leisure, and his father's contacts . John Kennedy's family is rich, but he had all the material possessions that
 John Kennedy never had and never would have to work for a living a day in his life . John Kennedy was a man who never had to work a day for his own life .
 His father wanted to free his sons from that pressure so they could pursue political careers . His father said he wanted to let his sons pursue their own careers .
 Richard Nixon, by contrast, came from a poor family and grew up without privilege . Richard Nixon was born in poverty and came from poor family . Nixon was president of the White House in 1972 .
 Whatever he had in life, he had to earn on his own with hard work and a keen mind, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter: "Whatever he has in life" had to work hard and work hard .
 In college, Kennedy was indifferent student, but he developed a love of American and European history . Kennedy: "In college, I was an indifferent student. In college I was indifferent"
 By the time he captured the Democratic nomination, he had evolved into a mature leader . Like Nixon, he was a voracious reader, a savvy politician, and a formidable debater .
 The presidential election of 1960 was one of the closest in American history . The election was held in the midst of a very close race for the presidency .
 He possessed a track record of significant achievements, he said . The majority of voters respected his years of experience as vice president . He said: "The majority of people respected him"
 Top issues of the day was preventing the spread of Communism around the world and curbing the influence of America’s rival superpower, the Soviet Union .
 Richard Nixon had unsurpassed credentials as an anticommunist politician whose views were respected by the majority of Americans . Richard Nixon was known for his anti-communist views .
 The most sustained effort to put Communism into practice began with the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the dictatorships of Vladimir Lenin and later Joseph Stalin . Lenin and Stalin's dictatorships were the result of the revolution .
 Communists claimed that their philosophy, when put into practice, would serve the common good . Communists claimed their philosophy was to serve the people of the world . Communists said that when put in practice, their philosophy will serve the public .
 Millions of people who resisted Communism in Russia and some thirty other countries throughout the twentieth century were killed . More than one hundred million victims in all were killed in all .
 Communists established totalitarian political regimes that flouted individual rights, banned freedom of speech, eliminated free elections, set up police states, corrupted the rule of law, and imprisoned and murdered opponents . In pursuit of their goal, Communists established .
 World War IT had ended with the defeat of Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Imperial Japan by the Allies . The United States, Great Britain, France, and the Soviet Union .
 With Germany and the Axis powers crushed, the Allies emerged as the great political powers of the postwar era . The Allies emerged in 1945 as the world's greatest political powers .
 Only the Soviet Union was a Communist nation and not a democracy . Of the Allied powers, only the Soviet Russia was a democracy, not a democratic .
 The end of the war resulted in a delicate balance of power between the democratic nations and the Soviet Union . No shots were fired in the cold war between the two countries .
 Winston Churchill warned in a famous speech that an ‘iron curtain’ now divided Europe into the free, democratic nations in the west, and totalitarian, Communist countries in the east . Winston Churchill said in his famous speech an 'iron curtain' now divides Europe .
 Richard Nixon owed his meteoric political career to his vigorous anticommunism at the height of the Cold War . Richard Nixon owes his rise to the strength of his anti-communism .
 Some Americans thought that Nixon had gone too far, and associated him with what they believed were excesses committed by Senator Joseph McCarthy and the House Un-American Activities Committee during their investigations of Communists in the U.S.
 John Kennedy, too, began the race for the presidency with some disadvantages . John Kennedy also had some disadvantages in the early years of his presidency .
 In that era, a prejudice that does not exist today might have prevented a person of that faith from becoming president . The prejudice that doesn't exist today may have prevented the president from being elected .
 Kennedy argued that he would not be a ‘Catholic president’ but merely a president who happened to be Catholic . Kennedy said he would be a Catholic president, not a Catholic .
 He persuaded enough people that a person’s religious beliefs should not bar him from the office, he persuaded enough to keep him .
 President Obama had served in the House and Senate for 14 years when he began his race for the presidency . He was not particularly accomplished as a legislator, but he had served 14 years .
 Nixon’s supporters portrayed Kennedy as a callow young man who was only forty-three years old and who had not taken his time in Congress seriously . Nixon's supporters said Kennedy had not been serious enough to be serious enough .
 They said his lack of experience made him unqualified to serve as president . They said he was unqualified for the job .
 Johnson believed Kennedy should wait his turn, until he was more mature, and not challenge him now for the nomination . Kennedy was the candidate for the 1964 Democratic Party .
 "He believed in the power of fate, and that his illnesses, injuries, and near-death experiences had marked him as a man who might be deprived of a long life," he said .
 He was a man of action determined to make the most of his time, who wanted to accomplish things now . He was determined to 'do things now' and 'make things right'
 In a series of televised debates between the two parties’ presidential candidates, the first in American history, Kennedy leveled the playing field as seventy million people watched .
 Nixon was famous as a relentless and ruthless debater, and many expected him to vanquish Kennedy . He was famous for his ruthless and ruthless debating style .
 Kennedy relaxed, shaved closely, and allowed stage makeup to be applied to his face . But before the evening of the first debate, Kennedy relaxed .
 Nixon spent the day campaigning and had aggravated a painful leg injury . Nixon had aggravated the leg injury during the campaign .
 He showed up at the television studio with a day’s growth of beard, a five o’clock shadow . The actor's beard was a result of a day's growth .
 He recognized that television would change political campaigns forever . He recognized the impact of television television would have had on political campaigns .
 During the first debate, John Kennedy looked relaxed, fit, and charismatic . John Kennedy was relaxed and fit during the debate .
 Richard Nixon looked uncomfortable, swarthy, and nervous as he sweated under the hot lights . Richard Nixon was uncomfortable and swarthy .
 Kennedy also looked much younger, even though Nixon was only four years older than he was . Kennedy was also four years younger than Nixon, but Nixon was just four years old .
 In the end, it was not necessary for John Kennedy to win the debate on the issues . Kennedy won the debate, but not necessarily necessary to win it .
 It was enough that he looked as though he belonged on the same stage with Richard Nixon . It's enough for him to look like he belongs on stage with Nixon .
 Americans went to the polls on November 8, 1960, with no great issues divided the candidates . Americans voted for the first time since 1964 .
 Kennedy was as anticommunist as Nixon opposed Communist expansion, including in Cuba . Both saw the Soviet Union as a dangerous rival . Both opposed the Communist expansion of Cuba, including the island .
 Neither candidate was at the forefront of the civil rights movement . Neither candidate has ever been in office at the time .
 Voters chose between personalities of the two men as much as they did between their stands on the issues . Voters also chose between their personalities and their views on issues, according to CNN iReport .
 Nixon argued he, not Kennedy, had the proven leadership experience to guide the nation in a dangerous world . Nixon argued that he had proven experience to lead the nation .
 Out of 68. million votes cast, John Kennedy received only about 119,450 more votes than Richard Nixon . Richard Nixon received only 119,400 more votes .
 Nixon lost the presidency by just two tenths of 1 percent of the popular vote . Nixon had lost the president by just 2 tenths . of 1% of the vote .
 Not until the morning after the election was Kennedy declared the winner . Kennedy was the only person to win the presidential election .
 Without his father’s wealth, which funded much of his campaign, and without Lyndon Johnson as his vice presidential running mate delivering the electoral votes of Texas, Kennedy would not have won . Kennedy's father's wealth funded his campaign .
 On January 20, 1961, John Fitzgerald Kennedy took the oath of office as the thirty-fifth president of the United States .
 Half of America had voted against him, but on this day he behaved and spoke with confidence . "Half of America's vote against him," he said .
 He knew he had not won by a large margin at the polls, he sought to win a mandate now with his words . Although he knew he hadn't won by large margin, he wanted to use his words now with a mandate .
 President Obama summoned the American people to stand up for freedom in the shadow of the Cold War . He summoned the U.S. people to . stand up . in the . shadow of Cold War in America .
 He suggested that nations pursue peaceful cooperation, not military confrontation . Then he suggested that peaceful cooperation be pursued, not confrontation .
 Kennedy suggested that his election coincided with a special moment in history . Kennedy: "I'm sure we're going to have a special time in history"
 It was a patriotic call to the people of the U.S. to be civic-minded and politically active, says President Obama . "It was a patriotism call to be patriotic," says Obama .
 FOREIGN AFFAIRS and fighting the spread of Communism around the world dominated John Kennedy’s first two years in office .
 He was a Cold Warrior who had a personal fascination with counterinsurgency warfare, covert action, and special military forces, including the Green Berets, a small, elite unit of the United States Army .
 President Kennedy was a fan of Ian Fleming’s James Bond novels . President Kennedy had an instinctive and enthusiastic appetite for secret operations .
 A revolutionary who overthrew the Cuban government in 1959, Castro seemed to turn to America for inspiration . Castro seemed at first that he might turn to the U.S. for inspiration.
 He turned to the Communist Soviet Union for aid and set himself up as the repressive dictator of his nation . Instead of aid, he turned to Russia for aid .
 Central Intelligence Agency had developed secret plan to help anti-Castro Cuban exiles . Exiles were trained and equipped by the U.S. to invade their homeland, depose Castro .
 Kennedy authorized what became known as the Bay of Pigs operation . The operation was named for the spot on the Cuban coastline where armed exiles would land . Kennedy authorized the operation .
 The 14 hundred freedom fighters, heavily outnumbered, found Castro’s troops waiting for them . The 14,000 freedom fighters were heavily outnumbered .
 The CIA and the United States military had persuaded President Kennedy to support the plan by arguing that its success would not require him to send troops or air support into battle against Castro’s forces .
 They predicted that the invasion would trigger a spontaneous uprising by the Cuban people against their leader . They also predicted that it would trigger an uprising against the government .
 The assurances by CIA officials and military generals had proven wildly optimistic, even deluded . Now they implored Kennedy to commit American forces to save the catastrophic operation .
 He feared that it might trigger a direct military conflict with the Soviet Union . He feared it might provoke a direct conflict with Russia .
 The Bay of Pigs episode did not stop the CIA from developing other secret plans to overthrow or assassinate Fidel Castro . Operation Mongoose was part of the CIA's plan to assassinate Castro in Cuba .
 Kennedy worried that Cuba might influence or contaminate Latin America with Communism . Kennedy was worried about Cuba's influence or contamination of Latin America . Kennedy worried about the dangers of Communism .
 The Cuban failure did not deter Kennedy from opposing the spread of Communism in Southeast Asia . Nor did the Cuban failure .
 When Kennedy took office, there were several hundred U.S. military advisers in Vietnam . Several hundred American military advisers were in Vietnam at the time .
 He increased their number to seventeen thousand, believing that America should make a stand against Communism in Vietnam . He said America should take a stand to prevent the ideology from conquering not just Vietnam but also neighboring countries .
 In 1961, President Kennedy asked Congress to increase the size and budget of the U.S. military . President Kennedy increased the size of the military to prepare for the challenges .
 The Peace Corps is an organization to help developing countries improve their public health, education, and agriculture . To promote peace and international cooperation, he also inspired thousands to join public service .
 The U.S. and the Soviet Union almost went to war over another confrontation in Cuba . The Bay of Pigs was the first confrontation between the two countries since the Bay of the Pigs War .
 In October 1962, American spy planes detected the presence of Russian missile bases under construction there . The bases were believed to be under construction .
 The short distance between the island nation and the U.S. meant that from these sites Cuba or Russia could launch nuclear missiles at major cities and military bases in the eastern United States . Cuba's short distance from the United States meant that .
 The Soviets sent missiles to Cuba to deter any future invasion of the island by the United States . The U.S. had deployed in Italy and Turkey nuclear missiles that could be launched to attack the Soviet Union .
 Kennedy revealed the frightening discovery in Cuba in a televised address . Kennedy said the discovery was the result of a search for the U.S. Embassy personnel .
 The volatile Russian leader, Nikita Khrushchev, assumed, after the Bay of Pigs affair, that the young president was weak and would do nothing when the Soviets parked their missiles in Cuba . Kennedy had assumed that the Soviets would not do anything when they parked their missile in Cuba.
 Many of Kennedy’s advisers urged him to attack Cuba at once, first bombing the missile bases and then invading the island . Many of the advisers were urging him to invade Cuba .
 Kennedy took his time, delaying his decision and hoping for a diplomatic solution . Knowing that such a rash response might provoke war with Russia, Kennedy took a long time .
 The Cuban president declared a naval quarantine around Cuba and insisted that no Soviet ships carrying missiles or military supplies would be allowed to approach the island .
 Khrushchev ordered his ships to turn back at the last minute to avoid a war . At the last moment, to avoid war, he ordered the ships to return to the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy had taken the U.S. and the Soviet Union to the brink of a nuclear war in which millions might have perished, but he had solved the dispute in a responsible manner .
 The competition between democracy and communism was not limited to Cuba, Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, or even to planet Earth . The U.S. and the Soviet Union were the two countries that fought democracy .
 Each superpower believed it could tip the balance of influence in its own favor by placing satellites in space and men on the moon .
 The Soviet Union had already beaten America into space when it launched the first satellite, Sputnik 1, in 1957 .
 On April 12, 1961, the Russians launched the first man into space . The first man was launched into space by the Soviet Union .
 President Kennedy decided that America must catch up . For reasons of prestige, and also national security, he decided to do so .
 The National Aeronautics and Space Administration planned the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs . Inspired by President Kennedy, the agency was in charge of America’s space program .
 Domestic issues captivated John Kennedy less than foreign affairs . He was keen to reduce individual federal income tax rates and also corporate taxes . He believed corporate taxes were too high and stifled the economy .
 He was not one of the Southerners who disagreed with the Supreme Court’s ruling in the Brown Board of Education case . The Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional to ban black children from attending public schools with white children .
 He didn't want to suppress other rights of citizenship, including voting, attending public universities, or patronizing restaurants, shops, and hotels . Nor did many members of his own party in the South, he said .
 During the century since the Civil War and the end of slavery, African Americans had not enjoyed equal rights . African Americans have not had equal rights in the past 100 years .
 Kennedy worried that becoming a civil rights champion was premature . He worried that doing so would stir up political opposition among Southern Democrats . Kennedy worried it would endanger the programs and legislation he wanted Congress to approve .
 Vice President Lyndon Johnson was, by contrast, a more enthusiastic advocate for civil rights . However, his authority was limited. Vice President Johnson was more enthusiastic .
 Kennedy had been trying to keep the civil rights movement at arm's length . But a series of events made it impossible for Kennedy to keep it at arm’s length anymore . Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 In May 1963, Eugene "Bull" Connor, commissioner of public safety in Birmingham, Alabama, turned dogs and fire hoses on civil rights demonstrators . President Kennedy watched on television as Connor turned dogs on demonstrators in Birmingham .
 This played into Communist propaganda that the U.S. was the land of oppression of blacks and hypocrisy, not liberty . The United States was the place where blacks were oppressed and not liberty, according to the Communists .
 On June 11, 1963, Kennedy gave a televised address to the nation on civil rights . Kennedy gave the nation's first televised civil rights address on June 11 .
 Martin Luther King Jr. would say that when he led civil rights demonstrations in Chicago, the racism he encountered there was as vicious as anything he had seen in the Deep South . King would say he encountered racism in Chicago as he led demonstrations .
 In 1963, Kennedy’s focus on foreign affairs gave him two of the greatest pleasures of his presidency, the first occurring in Berlin . The first occurred in Berlin, and the second occurred in 1963 .
 In 1945, at the end of World War II, all of Germany was divided into zones of occupation . A treaty signed by the Allies divided all of the German capital into zones .
 The zones controlled by the United States, Great Britain, and France became West Germany . The zone controlled by Russia and the Soviet Union became East Germany . West Germany was West Germany and East Germany was East Germany in the 1960s .
 Berlin was divided into four sectors, each occupied by a different Allied power . Berlin, the national capital, was within the Soviet zone, and the city was divided between four sectors .
 President Kennedy and Vice President Johnson meet with civil rights leaders including Martin Luther King Jr. on the afternoon of the March on Washington, August 28, 1963 .
 In August 1961, during the first year of Kennedy’s presidency, the Soviets began to build a concrete-and-barbed-wire wall between East and West Berlin to prevent the population of the Soviet sector from fleeing Communism and escaping to the western zones .
 During the years that wall existed, Russian and Soviet-controlled East German soldiers shot to death several hundred men, women, and teenagers who tried to cross it to freedom .
 On June 26, 1963, President Kennedy stood on the free side of the Berlin Wall and spoke to a throng of three hundred thousand people in the square . President Kennedy visited the site in 1963 .
 The ecstatic crowd was the largest one that Kennedy had ever addressed . Kennedy addressed the largest crowd he'd ever seen .
 It was the high point of his worldwide popularity, he said . He said that he could not imagine enjoying a better day than this .
 Lee Harvey Oswald had always wanted to star in a historic moment . Like John Kennedy, he wanted to be a star of his own . Oswald was assassinated in 1963 .
 Oswald had matched every success with failure . Oswald had succeeded in JFK's assassination . Oswald's assassination was the first major assassination attempt since JFK .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, in October 1939 . He was the youngest of three brothers . Oswald was one of the youngest brothers .
 'A dark cloud had formed over him even before he entered the world. But it seemed as though he had a dark cloud over him,' he said .
 Lee's father died two months before he was born, and his unstable mother changed husbands, houses, jobs, and cities frequently . Lee's mother often turned over the care of Lee and his two brothers to orphanages or relatives . Lee was raised by unstable and unstable mother, often turning
 He had disciplinary problems at school, made few friends, threatened family members with knives, rebelled against authority . He missed so much school he was tracked down by truant officers and ordered to appear at court hearings .
 Oswald became interested in the Soviet Union and the teachings of socialism, Marxism, and communism as a teenager . Oswald became fascinated with socialism and Marxism as a child .
 These were strange pursuits for an American boy during the middle of the Cold War . The United States and the Soviet Union were locked in an intense ideological battle .
 Proposing oneself a communist in America at that time could trigger a government investigation . And, of course, proclaiming oneself a Communist in America could trigger an investigation . The government investigated the case in the 1930s .
 In October, after he turned 17, he enlisted in the United States Marine Corps . He enlisted in October .
 Oswald was a malcontent and constant complainer throughout his three years in the Marine Corps . He loved to argue with his superiors to show that he was smarter than they were . Oswald was always unhappy with his Marine Corps superiors .
 He never received a better than average performance rating, but the Marine Corps managed to teach him to shoot a rifle with skill and reasonable accuracy . He never got a higher than average rating .
 In September 1959, under false pretenses, he was granted a dependency discharge to care for his mother . In October 1959, in a series of bizarre events, he traveled to the Soviet Union, showed up in Moscow and tried to commit suicide there when his visa expired .
 He attempted to renounce his American citizenship at the U.S. embassy . That incident led him to the United States embassy, where he was arrested . He was arrested on suspicion of a federal crime .
 Oswald was assigned a job at a radio factory in the Soviet Union . Soviet officials were suspicious that he might be a spy or more likely mentally unstable . Oswald was allowed to remain in the country and assigned to work at a factory .
 In April 1961, he married a 19-year-old Russian woman named Marina Prusakova .
 Oswald grew dissatisfied with life in Russia, and wanted to return to the U.S. Oswald wanted to go back to the United States . Oswald was born in New York City, New York .
 He was no longer the exotic foreigner and center of attention he had been when he had first defected . He was now no longer an exotic foreigner . He is now the subject of much of the world's attention for the first time .
 He, Marina, and their infant daughter left the Soviet Union in June 1962 . He and Marina traveled to Fort Worth, Texas, where his mother and brother lived .
 Oswald struggled as a member of the lower class of Southern, white, working poor . Oswald struggled between the summer of 1962 and the spring of 1963 .
 Oswald, at his wife’s insistence, retreated to New Orleans with his tail between his legs to start over with a low-paying entry-level job that would never allow him to fulfill his grandiose dreams . After his failed attempt at killing General Walker, Oswald retreated to
 Group lobbied for fair treatment of the island nation after its revolutionary dictator, Fidel Castro, installed a Communist regime there .
 Marina and their little girl joined Lee in New Orleans . Around this time, Marina and her little girl moved to New Orleans, Louisiana .
 Marina discovered Lee still possessed his rifle when she found out he had it . Lee's rifle was found by Marina in her apartment . Marina was shocked to discover that Lee had the rifle .
 He kept it in a closetlike room where he hung his clothes and stored other belongings . He stored it in the closet where he kept his belongings and hung it .
 Lee practiced aiming his telescopic sight under the cover of darkness, when neighbors could not see him . Lee practiced aimings in the dark when he needed to be seen . Lee is a former Marine Corps member .
 On several occasions, Marina found him on the back porch, sitting alone in the dark, fondling the rifle . Marina says he fondled the rifle on several occasions .
 By June, Lee was distributing FPCC handbills on the streets of New Orleans . Lee distributed the handbill to the public .
 In July, he was fired from yet another job, and the U.S. Navy affirmed its decision to change his discharge from the Marine Corps to ‘undesirable” after it learned he had tried to defect to the Soviet Union . The Navy had jurisdiction over the Marine
 Oswald had argued, without success, that the service should reinstate his honorable discharge he had been given when he left the Marines, before he moved to Russia . Oswald had written to the Secretary of the Navy John Connally, asking for his discharge to be reinstated .
 Oswald got a taste of the celebrity he had always craved in August 1963 . Oswald shot the president of the United States in the face of the world's first black president .
 He was arrested in New Orleans after a street brawl with Cuban anti-Communists . Cuban antiCommunists objected to his distribution of pro-Castro literature . He was later arrested in a New Orleans street brawl after a fight .
 Marina did not know where he was or why he did not come home that evening . Oswald was jailed overnight, and Marina was not sure why he didn't come home . Marina had no idea where Oswald was and why he disappeared .
 Oswald shrugged his shoulders and told Marina that she did not understand him but boasted that some people understood the importance of his work . Oswald shrugs shoulders and tells Marina she doesn't understand him . He boasted that people understood his work.
 He made a brief television appearance on WDSU-TV, when he demonstrated in front of the International Trade Mart .
 Oswald participated in two New Orleans radio shows to discuss Cuba, Communism, and Marxism . Oswald participated on August 17 and then again on August 21 .
 His first appearance was on the WDSU-Radio program Latin Listening Post, hosted by William Stuckey . He first appeared on the program on the station .
 Stuckey taped the interview and then condensed it down to a fiveminute segment for broadcast . The interview was then edited into a five-minute segment . The full interview will be broadcast on ABC News at 8 p.m. ET on Monday .
 Today it is hard to grasp the hold that Cuba had on the American mind in the early 1960s . John Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, and Lee Harvey Oswald were all involved in Cuba .
 Half a century later, the program feels dated, like a dusty, antiquated artifact from the Cold War . The program feels like an old Cold War relic, but it's not dated .
 Cuba is Cuba's most controversial organization in the world, Cuba's largest group of Cubans . The group has been linked to Cuba for decades, including the Cuban diocese of Camels . Cuba's government has been accused of corruption in Cuba .
 Oswald was an exciting find for Bill Stuckey, a New Orleans reporter who had covered Latin American affairs in the city for several years . Oswald was the first person in the United States to be killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Lee Oswald was arrested and convicted this week for disturbing the peace . Oswald was convicted of disturbing peace . Lee Oswald's trial was the first of his own to be held in public view .
 He craved the publicity and was eager to show off his knowledge and oratorical skills . But he also craved publicity and wanted to showcase his knowledge .
 Stuckey played up the drama by touting Lee as some sort of pro-Castro mastermind . Lee is accused of being the mastermind behind the coup .
 He was the organization’s only member, and he had awarded the title to himself . "He was the only member," he said .
 Stuckey probed Lee for details about the FPCC, questioning him about the size of the membership rolls, the specific goals of the organization, and whether its members believed that Cuba was a puppet of the Soviet Union . Lee also questioned him about whether the FPcc was itself Communist
 The number of members and their names must remain secret, he said . He said that both the number and the names of the members must be kept secret .
 He explained that the organization’s central principle was “Hands Off Cuba!”—a policy of American nonintervention in Cuban affairs . The motto was printed on the handbills that he had distributed .
 Oswald denied Stuckey’s assertion that Cuba was a Soviet colony in the Western Hemisphere . Oswald denied the assertion .
 Stuckey asked him if the FPCC would continue to support Castro if he broke off relations with the Soviet Union . The FPCC was asked if he would support Castro in the event of a break with the USSR .
 Oswald argued the U.S. government had no right to interfere . Oswald argued that the United States had no obligation to interfere with the government . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 .
 "When our forefathers drew up the Constitution, they considered that democracy was creating an atmosphere of freedom of discussion, of argument, of finding the truth," he says .
 The rights, well the classic right of having life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, are the rights . The rights are the right to having life and liberty, according to the American Constitution .
 Oswald suggested that if America had adopted a different policy toward Cuba, and if the CIA had not meddled in its affairs, then “we could be on much friendlier relations” with Cuba, he said . Oswald said that if the U.S. had adopted different policy
 He was a provocative and garrulous guest, and Stuckey was eager to interview him again . He was the provocative guest of the day .
 Lee Oswald had withheld an explosive secret about his past, host says . Lee Oswald's secret was that he had withheld a secret of his past . Oswald had been involved in the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy in September 1963 .
 Oswald was a guest on the WDSU radio show Conversation Carte Blanche, hosted by Bill Slatter . Oswald appeared on the show on August 21 .
 Bill Stuckey debuted Oswald to the public four days earlier on his Latin Listening Post . Stuckeys had brought Oswald to Slatter’s personal attention .
 According to FPCC propaganda, “Castro’s government is completely free and independent and is in no way controlled by the Soviet Union.”
 Slatter and Butler had both researched Lee’s life before appearing on Latin Listening Post . Slatter: Lee's life has changed dramatically since his death .
 Oswald had failed to disclose things he had not disclosed . Oswald's family had found remarkable newspaper stories about things he'd failed to reveal . Oswald had not been in contact with the White House .
 Oswald had attempted to renounce his American citizenship, had defected to the Soviet Union . Oswald had returned to the U.S. in 1962, Butler said .
 He had the good sense not to try to deny the information that Slatter had collected on him . Slatter's good sense of not trying to deny that he had information .
 Bringuier: "I want to know exactly the name of the organization that you represent here in this city" But it inflamed the hotheaded mayor, who demanded in an excited clipped tone, “I have some confusion.”
 Oswald had been blindsided, but he was willing to discuss his life in the Soviet Union . Oswald was blindsided by the assassination, but was able to talk freely about his life .
 "He was enjoying the notoriety and public attention he was receiving tonight," he said . "I'm not surprised that he was enjoying it," he added .
 Bringuier recited a collection of boring statistics on the number of automobiles, telephones, and televisions per person in Cuba versus Russia . He also recited the price difference for Cuban sugar when sold to the U.S. versus Russia.
 Bringuier insisted Oswald Oswald had to explain. It was a long and confusing statement . Oswald insisted Oswald explain. Oswald insisted he was not trying to explain .
 The conversation veered into a long discussion about whether Oswald ever tried to renounce his U.S. citizenship for Soviet citizenship . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in the United States .
 Oswald lied and denied it, but Stuckey contradicted him with old newspaper clippings that claimed he did . Oswald lied, and then admitted he had done it, the story was true .
 Lee, whose vocabulary was limited, either could not remember the correct word, superfluous, or had forgotten how to pronounce it . Lee's vocabulary is limited, he said . Lee: "I don't know how to say superfluous"
 Oswald launched into a long-winded and unconvincing list of countries as he tried to carve a vague distinction between Marxism and Communism . Oswald launched his speech into a list of communist countries .
 Stuckey asked Oswald how he supported himself in Russia, and whether he had enjoyed a government subsidy . Oswald said he had no idea how much he had been subsidised by the government .
 Stuckey continued to ask Oswald about his time in Russia and pressed him again on whether he had tried to renounce his U.S. citizenship . Oswald was in Russia at the time of his death .
 Lee may have tried to renounce his citizenship, but it did not answer whether he had done so . Lee has been a U.S. citizen for more than a decade .
 The intricate question sounded obscure and meant nothing to the audience . It was meant to be an intricate question, but it meant nothing .
 Oswald said no, he had not been there but in the next breath he revealed that he knew the street (and pronounced its name with a proper Russian accent) and that the Soviet foreign ministry was located there . Oswald said he did not know the street but said he had been there .
 For a man who had lived in the Soviet Union during the Cold War, his comments about Russia were superficial and uninteresting . The comments were superficial, uninteresting, he said, but were uninteresting.
 If this was his moment to prove that he was a sophisticated political thinker, his performance was not that impressive . His performance was less than impressive .
 The program was almost over, but now he would have the opportunity to explain . He would be the first person to explain his role in the program .
 "We are honestly not interested in what Cuban exiles, or rightist . organizations might have to say," says CNN.com . "We're looking at the truth here and not what they say"
 Fair Play for Cuba Committee is an independent organization not affiliated with any other organization . Regardless of any of those facts, the committee is not affiliated .
 He was referring to the CIA sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and the 1962 Cuban missile crisis ten months ago . No doubt .
 Oswald got into the question of U.S. support for Castro’s overthrow of Batista . Oswald: “The United States was supporting Castro's overthrow of the Batista. It was a mistake,” Oswald said .
 Oswald spoke of the unavoidable consequences of reforms and diversification of agriculture . Oswald spoke about the consequences of the reforms . He said the reforms were necessary to diversify agriculture .
 He meandered onto topics like the production of sugar and tobacco versus sweet potatoes, lima beans, and cotton . He also talked about sugar, tobacco and sweet potatoes .
 Time expired and the program petered out without a dramatic climax . Then time expired . The program ended with a dramatic conclusion .
 He handled himself reasonably well when confronted by four hostile questioners on live radio . The president handled himself well in the face of four hostile questions .
 Oswald had made some factual mistakes and exhibited some verbal tics . Oswald made a factual mistake, but also exhibited tics, according to the historian . Oswald had a history of making factual mistakes .
 In a document he prepared, he describes the beginning of his involvement with the FPCC as though he had accomplished something of significance . In the document, he says he feels like he has accomplished something significant in his career .
 Oswald’s overblown description of his counterintelligence operations against anti-Castro exiles sounds ludicrous . In the extract below, Oswald's overblown descriptions of his operations against exiles sound ludicrous .
 He appropriates the language of “spy talk” that in his imagination a CIA agent might use . The author of this article uses the language he imagines a CIA officer .
 Oswald's writings are a riot of misspelled words, grammatical mistakes, punctuation errors, and lack of capitalization . Oswald’s writings are an embarrassment of errors and errors . Oswald was a member of the Communist Party in the Philippines .
 It's obvious that they are the musings of someone of limited education, even an autodidact, possibly dyslexic . It is obvious that these musings are of someone who has limited education .
 I infiltraled the Cuban Student directorate and then harresed them with information I gained including having the N.O. city atterny general call then in a restraining order pending a hearing on some so-called bonds for invasion they were selling in the New Orleans area
 "I caused the formation of a small, active FPCC organization of members and sympathizers. where before there were none. I caused the . formation of the FPCC . where before . there were . none of the . FPCC members are now a small group of sympathizers .
 He was the only member of FPCC in New Orleans, and he had failed to recruit another soul to serve Castro’s cause . The FPCC was the last member of the party in the city .
 Oswald, as was so typical for him, was suffering from another one of his delusions of grandeur . Oswald was not the only man in the world to be obsessed with the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Lee Lee is the National Director of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee of which he is a member . Lee is also a member of the committee of which I am a member.
 Oswald fancied himself a propaganda expert and claimed to have hitherto unrecognized expertise . Oswald claimed to be an expert in propaganda propaganda . Oswald was assassinated in November 1963 .
 Oswald was too uneducated to realize how pathetic his boast of being an expert in “street agitation” would seem to any real intelligence agent . Oswald was uneducated enough to realize that his boast would seem pathetic to anyone .
 It allowed him to indulge the conceit that he had actually accomplished something, he said . "It allowed me to indulge myself," he said. "I'm not going to do anything," he added .
 He was, he believed, on his way to becoming an important public spokesman for a cause . He believed he was going to become an important spokesman for the cause .
 In the Soviet Union, he had been a novelty—the American who rejected capitalism and chose socialist life in Russia . In the United States, he was a novelty .
 Fidel Castro was another kind of novelty -- the American who had chosen life in Communist Russia but rejected it and came back home . Now he was a disciple of Fidel Castro and his revolution . He was a novelty: The American who rejected life in Russia but returned home, only to become a
 The media lost interest, the invitations dried up, and it looked as though his brief brush with fame was over . The media had lost interest in the event .
 Oswald said on the New Orleans radio programs would have given any listener cause to suspect that he had already attempted to murder one man and soon would try to kill another . Oswald said nothing that Oswald said would have led any listener to suspect he was already trying to kill one man .
 In twelve weeks, he would attempt to assassinate the president of the U.S. President . He would be assassinated in twelve weeks .
 Oswald would speak to a much larger audience than had heard him on a New Orleans radio station . He would answer hostile questions in the same manner as he did on the radio show . Oswald would soon be speaking to a larger audience .
 Not only did he sit in the dark on the back porch peering through the telescopic sight at imaginary targets, he also worked the bolt action of the Mannlicher-Carcano .
 Marina had seen him clean the weapon four or five times in the six months he had owned it, Marina said . Marina said he had cleaned the weapon up to five times before using it .
 Now, in New Orleans, she asked him why he continued practicing with the rifle . Now, she wants to know why he kept practicing with it .
 There was no way she was going to agree to leave the United States and move to Fidel Castro’s notorious revolutionary island .
 Lee had fantasized about killing Richard M Nixon, JFK’s republican opponent in the 1960 presidential election . Lee had fantasies about killing Nixon, the president's Republican opponent in 1960 .
 Marina barricaded Lee in the bathroom until he cooled off and promised he would not try to do it . Marina said Lee promised not to try to kill himself .
 Despite Lee’s obsession with Cuba, he never complained to Marina about President Kennedy . Lee never complained about the Kennedy family .
 I always tried to point out to him that he was a man like any others who were around us. He was like any other man who was around us, she said .
 Lee was not interested in his wife’s sanguine opinion of his limitations, he said . Lee was proud of his achievements, but he was not happy with his wife's view of him .
 Oswald was born with what Oswald called his mean independent streak and the smug sense of superiority he exhibited in the Marine Corps could never function in Soviet society . Oswald called himself a "mean independent streak" and a "smear of superiority"
 She once said, “I am sure that if he had gone there he would not have liked it there, either.” She also said that she is sure he would have not liked it in the United States .
 Kennedy possessed a glamorous effervescence that made him seem larger than life . He was a symbol of a new era of American optimism and spirit . Kennedy was a youthful symbol of an American optimism .
 With his wife, who was just thirty-four, and two beautiful young children, he cultivated a jaunty, athletic public image of a sailor, touch-football enthusiast, sportsman, and father .
 Jacqueline Kennedy, or Jackie, as she was known, became a star in her own right . Jackie Kennedy was the first lady of the White House to be elected to office in 1961 .
 She appeared on the covers of magazines looking more like an alluring movie actress than a politician’s wife . Celebrated for her elegant fashion and understated beauty .
 She remained a reserved, quiet person whose desire for privacy made her all the more fascinating to the public . And yet, she remained a quiet person .
 A strong believer in the preservation of America’s past, she undertook a much-needed historic renovation of the White House . She hosted a popular and unprecedented television special on the result, and brought the president's home alive .
 President Kennedy claps his hands as his children Caroline and John Jr. dance for him in the Oval Office at the White House . President Kennedy's children were dancing for him at the time .
 John Kennedy’s sharp wit and ability to laugh at himself enhanced his appeal . John Kennedy was known for his sharp wit, ability to joke at himself .
 He loved history for its lessons and inspiration, but was also drawn to its tragedy, irony, and disappointments . He was drawn to history's tragedy and irony, but also its tragedy and disappointment .
 His cheer camouflaged a lifetime of physical pain and multiple illnesses, including Addison’s disease . His public image of vigor was often obscured by his illnesses .
 President George W. Bush battled his ailments in secret, believing that the American people did not want to see their president as weak or sick . He battled his illness in secret .
 Of all his characteristics, John Kennedy had one more important than all the others, he had a personal example to inspire people, through words and personal example, to attempt great things . Kennedy had a unique ability to inspire and inspire people to try and achieve great things.
 In August 1963, death whispered in Kennedy’s ear again when it took the life of his newborn, two-day-old son, Patrick . Patrick Kennedy died in August 1963 at the age of two .
 They had kept it hidden from the American people from the public, but theirs was not the picture-perfect marriage . The couple had kept their marriage secret from the U.S. public .
 He viewed marriage the way a royal prince might see the institution as useful but not sacrosanct . He viewed it the way he might see marriage as necessary and useful . He said marriage was necessary but not a sacred institution .
 Marina was fed up with life in New Orleans and with her husband . She left New Orleans for Irving, Texas, a suburb of Dallas, in September .
 She was expecting her second child next month, and her friend Ruth Paine had offered to take her in and care for her . Paine was pregnant with her first child . She was due to give birth to her second baby next month .
 Ruth drove from Irving to New Orleans to retrieve Marina and her simple household goods . Ruth drove her station wagon from Irving, New Orleans, to retrieve the items .
 Unbeknownst to her, he carried the rifle to the car and slipped it inside . He then slipped it into the back of the car .
 Lee's rifle that Lee had used to try to murder General Walker was now back in Dallas . Lee had been trying to kill General Walker . Lee used the rifle to try and kill Walker, but it was found in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald and Mannlicher-Carcano were barely acquainted at the time of the Walker attack . Oswald and the Mannlicer-carcano had barely known each other .
 He had owned the gun for less than three weeks when he attempted to use it to assassinate the general . He had only owned the weapon for three weeks .
 LEE LEFT New Orleans too, but he did not head straight to Texas or to his family . LEE left New Orleans to Texas, but did not go straight to his Texas home .
 New Orleans to Fort Worth, Texas, is a major stopover in the U.S. and Mexico .
 Oswald went to the Cuban embassy in Mexico City, where he applied for permission to travel to Cuba . Oswald traveled to Mexico City four days after his departure from New Orleans .
 The Cubans scoffed at his wild tales of Fair Play for Cuba activities . They gave him no special treatment and told him it would take months to get him to Cuba .
 Frustrated, he went to the Russian embassy for help in getting to Cuba or returning to the Soviet Union . He then went back to the embassy in Cuba or returned to the USSR .
 The Russians knew he was an odd duck and were in no hurry to allow him back into their country either . The Russian government is not interested in letting him back in their country .
 John F Kennedy was worried about proliferation of nuclear weapons among the superpowers . JFK worried about the proliferation of nukes among superpowers in fall of 1963 .
 The United States and the Soviet Union possessed arsenals of several thousand nuclear weapons . The U.S. and the former Soviet Union had several thousand weapons .
 Most of the bombs were more powerful and destructive than the two atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan, in 1945 to end the Second World War . Most of them were more destructive and powerful than the bombs dropped in 1945 .
 Through the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s, nations that possessed nuclear weapons tested their effectiveness and demonstrated their military superiority by exploding them in their own territory, either underground or in the ocean .
 The tests still resulted in radioactive fallout, which winds and weather systems could carry for hundreds of miles and contaminate the food supply or towns and cities .
 "Our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet," he said . For in the end, he said, “our most basic link is to our planet”
 Kennedy negotiated with the Russians to end atmospheric testing in 1963 . In October 1963, he signed a Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty .
 Oswald returned to the U.S. on October 3, 1963, and went to Dallas, where he visited Marina at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving . Oswald spent the weekend of October 11—13.13. He spent that weekend at Paine's house in Dallas
 Paine worried that Oswald Oswald was having trouble getting a job, so she told some of her friends he needed work . Paine told Oswald's friends that he was struggling to find a job . Oswald died in 1918 at the hands of Paine's family .
 Lee and Marina agreed that he would live at a boardinghouse in Dallas during the week and visit Marina at Ruth Paine’s house in Irving on the weekends . The couple agreed that Lee would live in Dallas, Texas, for the rest of the week .
 Ruth disliked Lee and hated the way he treated his wife, Marina . Ruth hoped Marina would leave him, but she did not .
 Marina threw her husband a surprise birthday party on Friday, October 18 . He seemed touched by the party .
 Lee attended a right-wing political rally where General Walker spoke . Lee attended the rally on October 23, 2013 . General Walker is a conservative Republican .
 Marina Oswald was investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation . Marina Oswald is a former FBI agent who worked for the CIA in the 1960s and '90s .
 It was nothing serious, she was told, just a follow-up to chat with him since he had returned home from Russia almost 17 months ago . She was told it was just a chat to chat about his return from Russia .
 Oswald believed the FBI agents were harassing Marina Marina . Oswald thought the visits angered Oswald . Oswald believed Marina Marina was harassing him .
 On November 12, he left an angry note at the FBI headquarters in Dallas for agent James Hosty, telling him to leave his family alone . Hosty left the angry note telling the FBI to leave the family alone.
 It was the autumn of 1963, and the presidential election was just one year away . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1968 .
 John Kennedy planned to run for a second term and hoped to win by a margin wider than he had eked out in 1960 . Kennedy was elected president of the United States in 1964 . Kennedy hoped to run again for the presidency .
 To increase his chances of reelection, he planned to travel to Texas in late November to campaign with Vice President Lyndon Johnson .
 In 1960 Kennedy had chosen Johnson as his running mate over the strong objection of his brother Robert Kennedy . Kennedy chose Johnson over his brother's strong objection .
 Without Johnson and the electoral votes of Texas, JFK would not have won that election . Without those votes, JFK wouldn't have won the election .
 Texas was to be a major political trip involving private meetings with Democratic leaders, public speeches, and fund-raising events . Texas is to be the first state of its own state .
 The president and first lady would visit five cities in two days: San Antonio, Houston, Fort Worth, Dallas, Dallas and Austin . They would then head to Johnson's Texas ranch to rest .
 She had traveled with JFK to Paris, and without him on private visits to Italy, Greece, India, Pakistan, and Pakistan .
 She had not been on a real campaign trip since the presidential election in the fall of 1960 . But she was not on a campaign trip for the first time since that election .
 Patrick Bouvier Kennedy died August 9, two days after he was born . The events would come only three months after her new baby had died .
 It was also John and Jacqueline Kennedy’s last night together in the presidential mansion . And although they did not know it at the time, it was also their final night together .
 The occasion was a reception for the federal judiciary, including the justices of the Supreme Court of the United States . The event was held in Washington, D.C.
 Several days earlier, the Kennedys had treated hundreds of guests to a performance by the Black Watch, the legendary British military unit .
 President Barack Obama hosted a dinner for Nobel Prize recipients . The dinner was one of the most memorable of the president's presidency .
 He quipped that never had such talent and brilliance been assembled at the White House—since Thomas Jefferson had dined there alone . Thomas Jefferson dined in the Oval Office alone .
 On Monday, November 25, they would host their next dinner party . It was to be a State dinner for the new chancellor of West Germany, Ludwig Erhard . The party was the first to be held in West Germany .
 They loved to entertain, not just at official events but at intimate, private dinner parties and small dances . They loved entertaining, they also loved entertaining intimate dinner parties .
 Guests were invited upstairs to the private family quarters of the family .
 It was at a small private dinner party in Georgetown where they had met twelve years earlier . The two had met at a private dinner in Georgetown .
 Earlier in 1963 they had celebrated the 10th anniversary of their marriage .
 Jackie would organize a little party for him before the adults arrived for dinner . Jackie would arrange for him to have a party before dinner .
 The Kennedy family would travel to Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, for Thanksgiving . They would spend the holiday at the Kennedy family home there . The family would also spend Thanksgiving in Hyannis .
 JFK was eager to preside over the first ever presentations of the new Presidential Medal of Freedom to a group of distinguished Americans . JFK was already on JFK's calendar for December 6 .
 He created the award and then vetted the names of potential recipients . He had created a list of winners .
 The ceremony would epitomize the Kennedy style and its celebration of achievements in literature, culture, and the arts . It would be the first ceremony of its kind .
 JFK spoke at Amherst College in a tribute to Robert Frost last month . JFK had paid homage to the arts in a speech at the college .
 It was similar to President John Adams’s famous observation that he studied politics and war so that his grandchildren could study poetry and music . President Adams said he studied war and politics to prepare his grandchildren for poetry .
 Jackie was the more passionate cultural devotee in the family, but JFK's enthusiasm for American achievement in all fields was genuine . JFK might prefer a private screening of the Hollywood spectacular Spartacus .
 Byron White is a former football star and Justice Department lawyer . Byron White was nominated to be a Supreme Court justice by Kennedy . Kennedy said White excelled in everything he had ever attempted .
 The Kennedys were looking forward to Christmas in Palm Beach, Florida, at the family compound there .
 The president and Jackie had just signed the first batch of their Christmas cards for mailing later . President and Jackie were signing the cards at the time .
 He was never one of those presidents who complained about the debilitating stress and awesome burdens of the office . President Obama never complained of the stress of the job, he said .
 He knew how lucky he was—not just to be president of the United States, but to be alive at all . Obama knew he was lucky to live in America, but also to have survived it .
 In addition to his own narrow escapes, many of those close to him had died young . Even some of his own siblings, even some of them died young, he says .
 He and Jackie had lost their stillborn daughter, Arabella, and their son Patrick, who had lived less than two days . Jackie would have named Arabella .
 Three-day political swing through Texas in the week before Thanksgiving . He would visit five cities and make numerous speeches, as many as three in one day .
 She had never liked campaigning and had not done it since the election of 1960 . She had not been campaigning since 1960 and had never done it again .
 In the fall of 1963, John and Jacqueline Kennedy might have been more in love with each other this November than they had been since the year they married . JFK's private life was revealed in the wake of all the subsequent revelations about his private life .
 The president had received warnings that he might not be entirely welcome in Texas . The president has been warned he may not be welcome in the state .
 In Dallas, various political enemies criticized him as either too liberal on civil rights or too soft on Communism . In Dallas he was criticized for being too liberal and too soft .
 Weeks earlier, opponents had protested a visit to the city by Adlai Stevenson, Kennedy’s ambassador to the U.N. Weeks later, Stevenson visited the city .
 It was exactly the aspect of Stevenson’s prickly, egghead personality that made JFK dislike him . JFK disliked Stevenson because of his prickly personality .
 When the ambassador asked an angry woman how he might help her, she hit him in the head with a cardboard picket sign . The ambassador was asked how to help her by a woman who hit him .
 The previous month, on October 3, Senator J William Fulbright of Arkansas suggested during a meeting with President Kennedy that he not go there . Senator Fulbright suggested during the previous month that President Kennedy not go .
 The hostile reception that Adlai Stevenson received in Dallas on October 24 seemed to confirm Fulbright’s counsel . Stevenson received a hostile reception in Dallas, Texas .
 On November 4, Byron Skelton, Democratic national committeeman from Texas, sent a letter to Attorney General Robert Kennedy that warned him about the hostile political climate in the city . The letter was sent to Kennedy, the attorney general, from Texas .
 Skelton was so worried, he also wrote a warning to an aide of Lyndon Johnson . The following week, when he was in Washington, he alerted two other men at the national committee . The next week, he wrote another warning to the aide of Johnson .
 One woman from Dallas sent a letter to the president's press secretary Pierre Salinger . The letter was sent to the press secretary .
 No warnings would intimidate John Kennedy enough to stay out of Dallas . But no warnings would convince him to stay away .
 JFK believed that no president of the U.S. should ever be afraid to visit an American city . JFK refused to drop Dallas from his itinerary . JFK believed no president should be afraid of visiting American cities .
 Any man who showed such fear was not, in John Kennedy’s opinion, up to the job, he said . Kennedy: "Any man who shows such fear is not ... up to be a good leader"
 JFK was less interested in threats than he was in what Jackie planned to wear to Texas . JFK was traveling with his wife, Jackie, to Texas for the first time in his life .
 In general he was happy to leave such matters to her personal taste—except when he saw the bills . "I'm not sure what I'm going to do," he said .
 On one occasion, she insisted that reports of her extravagance were so exaggerated they could not be true .
 JFK did not micromanage Jackie’s wardrobe . But aside from occasional spats about the expense involved, JFK didn’t micromanish her wardrobe .
 In the family quarters of the White House, she began to show him the outfits she had chosen for the trip, holding them up in front of him .
 Three of the most attractive outfits included a black velvet dress, a matching white wool suit, and a matching pink suit .
 John and Jacqueline Kennedy said good-bye to their daughter, Caroline, on Thursday, November 21 . Caroline's parents were at the White House at the time .
 On the lawn, three helicopters, their rotor blades spinning, prepared to leave for Andrews Air Force Base, where their jet was waiting . Three helicopters were waiting for the helicopter to leave the base .
 John would celebrate his third birthday in a few days, his parents decided to take him along for the ride to Andrews . As a special treat, they took him to Andrews for a helicopter ride .
 The president sat with his boy and a few Secret Service agents in the first copter . The president and his son sat in the helicopter .
 She left the White House and walked to her husband’s aircraft . Then, dressed in a white two-piece suit, she walked out of the room .
 Air Force One is the sleek new jet that has become the symbol of the modern presidency . The jet is a sleek new plane that is the symbol for the modern president .
 The plane had gone into service on October 21, 1962, making John Kennedy the first and only president to have flown in it so far . John Kennedy was the first president to fly in the plane .
 It was a beautiful aircraft decorated with two tones of bright blue paint and a big red, white and blue American flag painted on the tail . The plane was decorated with a big, white, and blue, American flag .
 Raymond Loewy, the famous industrial designer, had given the aircraft his imprimatur . JFK himself had approved the design of the aircraft .
 Kennedy considered the aircraft one of the great perks of the presidency . Kennedy considered it a big step up from his own private plane, the Caroline, which he had flown .
 The plane had a galley and a bedroom, and Kennedy used it to great effect during the campaign . Kennedy and his staff used the plane to use during the election .
 At Andrews, John Kennedy Jr. wanted to get on the plane and fly to Texas with his parents . Kennedy Jr.'s parents wanted to take him to Texas to join them in the military .
 The president told his son he could not come on the trip, and explained that he would see him in a few days . The president said he will see his son again in a couple of days .
 The Kennedys said good-bye to their son and boarded Air Force One for the flight to San Antonio, Texas .
 The president and first lady are headed west to Texas for two days of back-to-back events . The plane took off, bearing the president and the first lady west .
 John Jr., accompanied by Secret Service agent Bob Foster, returned to the White House by helicopter . John Jr. and Bob Foster returned by helicopter to White House .
 John Kennedy had left unfinished paperwork behind on his desk in the Oval Office . It included an autographed photograph he intended as a gift for a supporter . The photo was intended to be a gift to his supporter .
 The Kennedys left the White House for Texas on the day they left for Texas . A man waiting twelve hundred miles away in Dallas was eager for the president to arrive .
 President Kennedy was not an important politician who wanted to discuss business with President Kennedy . He was not important politician, he said, but wanted to talk business with Kennedy .
 He was not a supporter who hoped to shake his hand, nor one who had purchased a ticket to the November 22 breakfast to be held for several hundred people in Fort Worth, or for the big lunch scheduled in Dallas that afternoon .
 John Kennedy was not a political opponent of John Kennedy’s who planned to protest his policies with a homemade, hand-lettered cardboard sign . He was not an opponent of Kennedy's policies .
 John Kennedy had something else in mind when he arrived in Texas . He was waiting for him when he was killed .
 The man’s timing was strange, because these feelings had come on all of a sudden, he says . But the man's timing wasn't strange, he adds . The man's feelings came on suddenly, he said .
 Oswald awoke in Dallas, Texas, on November 19, 1963, on the morning of Tuesday, November 19 . Oswald did not know that within the next three days, he would decide to murder the president of the United States .
 If a fortune-teller had prophesied this future, the 24-year-old married father of two would not have believed it .
 Oswald was not one of Oswald’s corrosive obsessions with JFK . Oswald was obsessed with the Kennedy assassination . Oswald's obsession with JFK was not among his many obsessions .
 He had not been stalking the president or fantasizing about killing him, officials say . He was not, as far as can't be told, told, about fantasizing .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s list of longsimmering resentments, frustrations, and grievances was not one of them . Oswald was not happy with the Kennedy presidency . Oswald had a long list of grievances against the Kennedy administration, including the president .
 The Dallas Morning News published the details of the route President Kennedy’s motorcade would follow when Air Force One would lift off from Fort Worth and land at Love Field .
 The presidential limousine would take JFK on a long, circuitous motorcade through downtown Dallas to a lunch for more than 2,000 people at the Trade Mart . From there, JFK would take a big, custom-built Lincoln Continental convertible . The president would take the limous
 A parade would allow tens of thousands of Dallas citizens who would not otherwise glimpse JFK to assemble on the sidewalks and streets to see the president in person . The parade would be the first time a parade has been held in Dallas, Texas .
 Many people working in office buildings along the route could open windows overlooking the street to enjoy a good, unobstructed view of the president .
 After the limousine drove through downtown Dallas, it would turn right from Main Street to Houston Street, proceed one block, turn left on Elm Street . Finally, as the crowds thinned in an area known as Dealey Plaza, pick up speed, vanish under an underpass .
 Hertz rental car company put up a big yellow clock atop the roof . It was a local landmark that made it a Hertz landmark .
 He didn't know that John F Kennedy would be driving right past the place he worked in three days because he probably failed to read the newspaper on the day the story ran . But he didn’t know that he would be .
 Oswald was too cheap to buy a daily paper, Oswald was in the habit of reading stale, day-old newspapers left behind in the lunchroom by coworkers . Oswald was not a newspaper owner, but a paper left behind by coworkers left behind . Oswald died at the age of 92 in
 Oswald learned for the first time that the president of the United States would drive past his work-place . Oswald was not aware of the president's visit to Dallas until two days before he was scheduled to meet him in Dallas .
 The distance between an open window on the fifth, sixth, or seventh floors and Elm Street was too great to fire a pistol at a . Stationary target below, let alone a moving car .
 A pistol's short barrel could not guarantee sufficient accuracy at that range . A pistol’s short barrel was not guaranteed sufficient accuracy, the author says . The gun's barrel was too short to guarantee accuracy .
 Oswald would have known from his military training that someone would need to use a rifle to hit someone from such a distance . Oswald's military training would have been able to shoot someone from a distance, but he would know from his training that it would be difficult to hit .
 Abraham Lincoln, James Garfield, and William McKinley were all murdered at close range by lone gunmen firing pistols in 1865, 1881, and 1901 . Lincoln, Garfield, McKinley, and McKinley had all been killed at close ranges .
 In 1912, former president Theodore Roosevelt had been shot in the chest with a revolver during his campaign for reelection as a third-party candidate . Roosevelt survived the wound, but he survived .
 On February 15, 1933, an assassin in Miami, Florida, fired a pistol at a convertible car occupied by president-elect Franklin Roosevelt . President-elect Roosevelt was hit by the bullet in the convertible car .
 The gunman missed his target but wounded the mayor of Chicago, Anton Cermak, who was standing next to Roosevelt . The mayor was wounded in the shooting .
 Two Puerto Rican nationalists tried to assassinate President Harry Truman in 1950 . Truman was in the guesthouse where he was living during White House renovations .
 Four years later, on March 1, 1954, while Congress was in session, a gang of four other Puerto Rican nationalists opened fire with semiautomatic pistols . Five congressmen were wounded, but not killed, five congressmen .
 Bullet holes from this attack scar the furniture in the House chamber . To this day, bullet holes remain in the furniture .
 John Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald were brought together by a staggering coincidence . JFK and Oswald were both assassinated in November 1963 . JFK was assassinated in March 1963 in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald would never have thought of killing Kennedy at all if the publicized motorcade route had not taken JFK to the doorstep of Oswald’s place of employment . Oswald was likely to have killed JFK if the motorcade had not gone to Oswald's place of work .
 He had learned to shoot in the U.S. Marine Corps, and owned a rifle . He was a Marine Corps veteran .
 Oswald decided to assassinate President Kennedy between November 19 and the afternoon of November 21 . Oswald's assassination took place between the morning of November 19, November 21, 1963 .
 It could have been as early as the morning of Tuesday, November 19, but only if he broke his habit and read the moming paper the same day it came out . The mothering paper was published on November 19 .
 If he followed his usual custom, then he would not have read Tuesday’s paper until the following day, the moming of November 20 . He would have read it the next day .
 Oswald read the day-old paper, perhaps he also consulted Wednesday's Dallas Times Herald, which confirmed the motorcade route . Oswald also consulted the paper's afternoon newspaper, the Times Herald .
 The morning paper published a map of the route that Kennedy’s limousine would follow . Then, on Thursday, November 21, to make sure that the public knew where to go to see the president .
 Jackie Kennedy was first to disembark from Air Force One at San Antonio International Airport . Her husband also disembarked at the airport .
 Waiting to receive them was Vice President Lyndon Johnson, along with various dignitaries . The ceremony was held at the White House in Washington .
 Johnson had flown from his ranch to San Antonio on his own private plane . Johnson arrived about an hour before the president .
 He killed the time by having lunch with his wife and getting a haircut . He also got a haircut and had lunch with wife .
 Also waiting was the presidential limousine, flown in the night before from Washington . The presidential limo was flown in from Washington and flown in to Washington .
 The Lincoln convertible was custom-built by the Ford Motor Company . It was a Lincoln convertible that had been custom built by Ford . The convertible was the first of its kind .
 A second car, a 1955 open-top Cadillac, was flown to San Antonio . The Secret Service had nicknamed the Queen Mary, a car nicknamed the "Queen Mary"
 One hundred twenty-five thousand people lined the motorcade route . A large number of high-school students carried flags and signs .
 In honor of the president’s visit, merchants had put up their Christmas decorations one week early . The president's visit is scheduled to take place on Friday .
 Jackie touched the woman, touching her fingertip to the form of man to give him life . As in da Vinci’s painting of God touching his fingertip, the woman touched the man . Jackie touched her fingertips to give her life .
 John Kennedy gave an invigorating speech on the challenges of the future . John Kennedy spoke at the end of his speech at Kennedy Center .
 "It is an era which calls for action, and for the best efforts of all those who would test the unknown and the uncertain in every phase of human endeavor," says President Obama . "The future of the world is in its infancy," says Obama .
 From Brooks Medical Center, the Kennedys rode in a half-hour motorcade to Kelly Field . Air Force One had been moved to a military airfield adjacent to San Antonio International, where Air Force 1 was moved .
 They boarded the plane at 3:48 pm. for the forty-fiveminute flight to Houston . The plane was headed to Houston, Texas, at 3.48pm .
 Oswald had already decided to kill JFK before he had touched down in San Antonio, Texas . Oswald was already planning to kill Kennedy before he arrived in the U.S.
 On the morning of November 21, he ate breakfast at the Dobbs House restaurant in New York City .
 He was not in the habit of eating breakfast out, and he couldn’t afford to do it, he said .
 Oswald had about twenty to fifty hours to make—and carry out—his scheme . Depending on the exact timing of his decision, he had about 20 to 50 hours to carry out .
 He was a trained and experienced rifleman who would have known that a successful assassination required careful advance planning . He was an experienced sniper who would know how to kill someone .
 A proper sniper attack combined angles, timing, stealth, concealment, and patience . No, a proper sniper attacks combined angles and timing, timing and stealth .
 One of the upper floors, high over the street, would place him above the sight lines of parade watchers and the passengers in the multicar motorcade . The upper floors would be high above the view of spectators .
 He could position himself to shoot down at the president, from an angle that would make it difficult for witnesses to spot him . That way he would position himself from a low angle, he could shoot down from the ground .
 A portion of the wood flooring was being refurbished, so workers had moved heavy cardboard cartons full of books to the south side of the floor . Workers had moved the cartons near the windows looking down upon Elm Street .
 Stacks of them obstructed a clear sight line across the room . They would shield anyone who wanted to remain hidden from anyone else on that floor .
 It would be as easy as a child stacking building blocks to move some cartons and arrange them into a wall on November 22 . It's possible to move the cartons in a wall in the U.S.
 There was almost no chance he could descend five flights of stairs without encountering coworkers or any policemen or Secret Service agents who might storm the building .
 He could hardly expect to stroll unnoticed down Elm Street with a rifle slung over his shoulder . Even if he didn’t pass anyone while escaping the building, he couldn't expect to pass anyone .
 No criminal wants to leave a murder weapon behind at the scene of the crime . The weapon was found in the car of a man who was found dead in a car crash .
 Inside grooves of a rifle barrel leave unique marks on a bullet so that a spent round can be identified later as having been fired from that particular weapon . The inside grooves on a gun barrel leave marks on the bullet .
 A brass cartridge case ejected from a rifle after the bullet has been fired can bear telltale signs that match it to the weapon from which it came . A brass case ejecting a rifle cartridge case can be found to match the weapon it came from, say experts .
 There was still a chance that law enforcement officials could trace the weapon to him, but that, he figured, should take a while .
 The would-be assassin had now chosen his floor and his method of disposing of his weapon . He had chosen the floor of the room and the method he wanted to dispose of the weapon .
 Fourteen large, tall double-hung windows ran along the south wall facing Elm Street .
 At some point he might have rehearsed his plans, performing a walk-through of the assassination . He might have done a walk through of his plans .
 Perhaps he walked the length of the wall, peering down to Elm Street through each window, assessing the suitability of its angle of view . Perhaps he looked at each window in order to see Elm Street .
 At the last window on the left, Oswald must have noticed its two advantages over all other windows on the floor . Oswald must also have noticed the advantages of this window . Oswald thought that the window was the best of all the windows in the room .
 Kennedy’s limousine would follow Houston Street to Elm Street on November 22 . Kennedy's limo would follow the route he would follow to Elm St.
 Oswald watched the traffic come up Houston Street, he had to have seen what an easy target a car on that road would be . Oswald had seen what he had seen was a car that would be easy target .
 For one block, the president would drive directly toward the Depository, up Houston Street, and toward that window . In other words, for one block he would drive .
 From Kennedy’s point of view, the window was the one on the far right end of the sixth floor . Kennedy: "From Kennedy's view of the window is the one of the windows" The window was on the left end of a sixth floor, Kennedy says .
 President's car would have to slow almost to a stop to make the hairpin, tight-angled left turn onto Elm Street . Second, right below the Depository, the president’s car would be forced to slow to a halt .
 No other window on the sixth floor offered an earlier look at the president’s approach up Houston Street or a longer look at back of the car .
 Oswald was willing but not yet equipped to carry out an assassination the next day . Oswald planned the assassination but was not equipped to do so . Oswald's assassination was the first time Oswald had carried out a major assassination .
 Oswald was spending weekdays at a Dallas rooming house at 1026 North Beckley Street, while Marina lived in Mrs. Oswald's apartment . Oswald was staying in the house at the time of his death .
 He kept his .38-caliber snub-nosed revolver and its leather belt holster in his room . He kept it in his bedroom .
 Police-style revolvers, unlike Oswald’s, had longer barrels, which made them more accurate but harder to hide from view . Oswald's revolver was a police-style revolver, not a police revolver .
 Paine’s house, in her garage, is lying flat on the floor, wrapped in a blanket . Paine's house is in a garage, lying flat .
 He was supposed to drop in at Ruth Paine's unannounced . But it was a Thursday, not a Friday, and he was not supposed to show up .
 Lee, who did not own a car or have a driver's license, asked Buell Wesley Frazier for a ride to Irving . Frazier says Lee asked Frazier to drive him to Irving, Texas . Frazier: "I don't think it's a good thing for you to be a
 Oswald approached Frazier at a work table at a first-floor work table, handling orders . Oswald was working at the time of the shooting, Frazier says . Oswald is believed to be the son of Lee Oswald .
 Frazier’s house, at the corner of Westbrook and Fifth, stood about half a block east from Ruth Paine's, both on the north side of Fifth . Frazier's house was at the same corner of the intersection as Paine’'s . Paine and Frazier lived
 Frazier realized it wasn’t Friday, Lee’s customary day to visit Marina for the weekend . Frazier realized that Friday was not his customary day of vacation .
 Frazier asked Oswald if he would also like a ride home after work tomorrow afternoon too, on Friday afternoon after work, but Lee said no, he did not need a ride on November 22 . Frazier also asked Oswald to give him a ride after work on Friday .
 It usually took until 5:20 P.M. to 5:35 PM. to get there, depending on traffic and the length of stops at train crossings .
 During the trip, neither man mentioned President Kennedy’s visit to Dallas . President Kennedy visited Dallas in 1963 .
 Oswald’s morning conversation with Frazier offers a clue that Lee had decided by no later than ten A.M. on Thursday, November 21, to assassinate President Kennedy . Oswald had decided no later that morning that he wanted to kill President Kennedy by November 21 .
 The fact that he did not bring his revolver to work that morning is persuasive evidence that he had not decided by the night of Wednesday, November 20, to commit the murder . And that he didn't bring his gun to work, he had decided not to commit murder, prosecutors say .
 Oswald’s last chance to carry the revolver from his rooming house and sneak it into the Depository . Oswald's last chance was Thursday morning . Oswald was carrying the revolver at the time .
 He could not go to his Dallas rooming house on Thursday evening to get it . He needed to drive with Wesley Frazier to Irving to get the rifle from Mrs. Frazier that night .
 There was another enthusiastic reception committee, another three-dozen gorgeous yellow roses for Jackie, another eager, straining crowd .
 The Kennedys worked the line, reaching over the top and shaking hands as they walked . They shook hands with each other as they crossed the line .
 Several women grabbed both of Jackie’s hands simultaneously, making it seem as if they might lift her off the ground and pull her over the railing . The incident occurred at the end of the day .
 She called out to Congressman Albert Thomas, whom JFK would honor that night at a huge dinner . She called for Thomas to be honored that night .
 Thomas and some of the other dignitaries rescued her and escorted her toward the car . Thomas and others rescued her from the scene .
 In Houston, she and the president would not ride in their Lincoln limousine . The president and his wife were in Houston, Texas, for the first time .
 It had been flown ahead to Dallas for the big, forty-five-minute motorcade that would happen tomorrow . The motorcade was flown ahead for Dallas, Texas, tomorrow .
 When the Kennedys arrived at the Rice Hotel, they retired to their suite . They retired to the hotel suite .
 Lee Oswald showed up at Ruth Paine’s home in Irving, Irving, to see her quarrelsome, violent husband . Marina was surprised and not too happy to see him at her home . Oswald was a quarrelsome and violent man .
 She was not pleased to find him at her home on a day he was not supposed to be there . She was shocked when he showed up on her doorstep .
 Marina discovered Lee was living under an alias at the Beckley Street rooming house . Marina was exasperated because she had discovered that Lee had been living under a alias .
 No one by the name of Lee Oswald lived there, she says . Recently, when she had telephoned there to speak to him, she was told that no one had ever lived there . She was told there was no one by Lee Oswald .
 It reminded her of his behavior when he had attempted to assassinate General Walker, she said . She said it reminded her that he had tried to kill her .
 She had demanded that her husband explain why he was using a false name again . She said he had been using the false name for more than a decade .
 Oswald’s visit was a pretext to go into the garage and retrieve his Mannlicher-Carcano . Oswald was using the pretext to retrieve the weapon from the garage .
 He planned to spend Thursday night in Irving and then bring it to work on Friday morning . He said he planned to bring it back to Irving, Texas, on Friday .
 The sight of his attractive young wife, his two-year-old daughter, and his newborn baby girl softened his murderous heart . Perhaps the sight of the attractive young . wife and her newborn baby daughter softened his . heart .
 Lee told Marina he loved her and asked her to move back to Dallas and live with him there . Marina said he wanted to live with her in Dallas, Texas . Lee asked Marina to return to Dallas, Dallas, to live in Dallas .
 He said he would rent a nice apartment for them and the children where they could begin their lives anew . He said they would live in a new apartment where they would begin their new life anew .
 It was hard for her to keep up with the laundry for two small children, she said . She said it was hard to keep track of the laundry .
 When he agreed to do it, she rebuffed him and said she didn’t want it after all . She said she wanted him to marry her and he agreed .
 Marina told him it would be better if he spent the money on something else, for himself . Marina said he should spend the money instead of himself .
 Oswald was not reconsidering killing Kennedy, he would have had no reason to buy a better apartment or purchase a washing machine . Oswald would have no reason for buying a new apartment or washing machine if he had considered killing Kennedy . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Oswalds discussed President Kennedy’s forthcoming trip to Dallas . Oswalds were married when they were killed in Dallas, Texas .
 Lee did not tell Marina that she could go to Love Field to watch the president’s plane land . Lee didn't tell Marina she could watch him land .
 He did not tell her that she could catch the motorcade as it crawls through downtown Dallas .
 Marina did not know that Lee knew exactly where to find President Kennedy . Marina knew Lee knew where he was going to find the president .
 She could not know that her treatment of him tonight would help him decide to follow through with his plans to see the president tomorrow . Nor could she know that she treated him like she did the president .
 Lee told her that he was lonely because he had not been to visit her the previous weekend . Lee said he had been lonely because of not being able to see her again .
 The Oswalds were bickering about their family life . John and Jacqueline Kennedy rested in Houston’s Rice Hotel and dressed .
 He was in the habit of changing clothes several times a day, even when home at the White House . He liked to look good, and he liked to change clothes frequently .
 His personal valet, George Thomas, was with him on the Texas trip and took care of all of his wardrobe needs .
 Dark hair and dark fabric framed her pale face and seemed to make her skin glow . Her dark hair and the dark fabric frame her face .
 The president and his wife sat down together in their hotel suite and dined alone . Now, dressed for the big dinner they would attend that night, the president of the U.S. sat down alone .
 It was impossible for any president to eat a meal in peace at a political dinner, says David Frum . Frum says .
 So many people wanted to talk to him that he never had a moment even to raise a fork or spoon to his mouth, let alone chew the food .
 They did not know it, but this was to be their last private dinner together . This was the last private private dinner they had together .
 John Kennedy could not have known it, but that night another man having his last dinner with his wife was still planning to bring his rifle to work tomorrow . John Kennedy was not the only man to be killed in the line of duty .
 Lyndon Johnson visited the First Couple's suite for an animated private talk about political rivalries and bruised egos among Texas elected officials . The president and first lady were in Texas for dinner .
 Jackie went to another room to practice her speech, but she could hear loud voices on the other side of the door . Jackie was practicing her speech at the time of the incident .
 Jackie said she could not stand Texas governor John Connally . Then, apropos of nothing, she said she couldn't stand the former governor .
 "I just can’t bear him sitting there saying all these great things about himself. I just can't bear him," she said .
 The president gave his wife a brilliant piece of advice that revealed what an astute political psychologist he was . The president's advice revealed what he was a brilliant political psychologist .
 "I came down here to heal. But for heaven’s sake don’t get a thing on him," he says . "I’m not going to get it on him, but for heaven's sake," he adds .
 Amateur film footage taken with a home movie camera shows how excited the audience was . The fugitive piece of lost but recently discovered amateur film footage was taken by amateur film camera .
 The Kennedys drove to the Houston Coliseum for the huge dinner honoring Congressman Thomas . The dinner was held at the Rice Hotel ballroom in Houston .
 He gave more of a breadand-butter talk designed to flatter local interests and leaders, especially the honoree . Instead of a talk, he flattered local interests, he gave a talk to local leaders .
 It was so fine that it seemed out of place in what was otherwise a pedestrian effort . Indeed, it was so much of place that it was not out of the way .
 The Kennedys left the Coliseum at a little after nine thirty p.m. and drove to the airport . They left at around 9:30 p.M. and left at the end of the day .
 Air Force One lands at Carswell Air Force Base, outside Fort Worth, Texas .
 Air Force One had closed the distance in geography and time that separated John F Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald . Kennedy was killed by Oswald in November 1963 .
 LEE WATCHED television for a while and then went to bed before Marina and turned off the light . LEE watched television until Marina was asleep .
 When Marina joined him, she sensed that he was still awake, only pretending to be asleep . Marina sensed that when she joined him she felt that he had not been asleep . She sensed that she sensed he was not asleep .
 When she extended her leg to touch his, he kicked it away from her . He kicked her away from him when she reached out for him .
 As the night lengthened on November 21, 1963, he had failed in love. And now, as the night . He had tried to save his life .
 If Marina had told him this evening that she loved him, that she and their daughters would live together again, Lee might look for a new apartment for his family instead of carrying a long package of “curtain rods” to work . Lee might be looking to find a new
 Without her approval, he was helpless, alone, and drifting toward oblivion . But tonight, without her approval tonight, he felt helpless .
 Oswald’s habit to copy sentimental Russian-language poetry into journals . Oswald's habit was habit of copying sentimental Russian language poetry in journals .
 Evidence suggests that she read some of the pages and annotated a few of them in her own hand . Some evidence suggests she also annotated some of them .
 Or maybe Lee just wanted to practice his Russian comprehension and handwriting . Or maybe maybe he was just trying to practice Russian comprehension .
 From the hundreds of lines he copied into his commonplace books, one phrase leaps out: "I am not afraid to say I am happy to say yes"
 It reads as though he was describing himself on the night of November 21, 1963 . The book was published in 1963 . It is believed to have been written by the author of the book .
 John Kennedy prepared to turn out the lights in his bedroom in Fort Worth’s Hotel Texas . John Kennedy was in the middle of the night on November 21 .
 In one day, he had flown from Washington, D.C., to San Antonio, Texas; had given a speech to twenty thousand people; toured a hospital; had toured a . hospital; flown from San Antonio to Houston; had . flown from Houston to Forth Worth, where Air
 He was driven to the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth, where he found himself now . Then he had been driven to a hotel where he was taken to meet friends .
 Tomorrow, on November 22, the president faced another tough schedule, which included a flight to Dallas, a big political lunch and a speech . The president's schedule also included informal remarks on the street outside his hotel; a breakfast and talk .
 In late summer and fall of 1960, 1960, he had spent weeks just like this on the campaign trail . He had been campaigning in the fall and winter months before .
 This trip to Texas was a dress rehearsal for next year, and it had proven what an asset Jackie was going to be during his second presidential campaign in the fall of 1964 . The trip was a rehearsal for the next year .
 I've got to speak in the square downstairs before breakfast, but stay in bed. I’ve got to talk downstairs downstairs . Stay in bed before breakfast. I'm going to speak downstairs, but I'm not sure if you're going to listen to me .
 They did not know that this was the last night they would spend together . They spent the night together at the home they shared together .
 Lee Oswald slipped into Mrs. Kennedy's bed after John and Jackie Kennedy had gone to sleep . Lee Oswald shot the president in the head with a single bullet .
 Paine’s garage, turned on the light, and lifted up the blanket and its deadly contents . Paine lifted the blanket up in the garage of his garage .
 Lee Harvey Oswald drifted off to sleep later that night, probably not until long after midnight . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in Dallas, Texas .
 The president had just been handed a copy of the November 22 edition of the Dallas Morning News, and he was irate . The president was irated .
 The ad was bordered in black, the way a newspaper might announce a tragedy or a death . But the ad was not black, but black . The ad is bordered with black .
 As the president read further, he saw a long list of complaints attacking him and his administration . The president read the list and said it was a list of things he'd like to hear .
 The ad demanded that Kennedy answer twelve defamatory questions that accused him of being soft on Communism and unpatriotic . The ad also demanded that he answer 12 questions about Communism and Communism .
 The ad claimed that “Thousands of Cubans’ had been imprisoned, starved, and persecuted as a result of Kennedy’s policies . Then the ad said that ‘Thousands of Cubanans had been jailed, starved and persecuted’ The ad also claimed that thousands of
 The ad even accused the president of selling food—“wheat and corn’—to communist enemies engaged in killing American soldiers in South Viet Nam . The ad also said that the president was selling food to communist enemies .
 The handbill resembled an Old West-style reward poster with front and side mug shots of the “criminal” on the loose . The thirty-fifth president of the United States was the thirty-five president .
 Dallas police chief had already gone on television to ask his fellow citizens to receive the president with respect . To ease tensions, the police chief has already asked Dallas citizens to greet the president .
 Kenneth O’Donnell was JFK's longtime aide and trusted member of the ‘Trish Mafia’ trio that had guided his political career for years . O'Donnell was with the president in Texas that morning when he died .
 JFK had gotten too close for JFK's comfort . There were a lot of people pressing near them, and some of them got too close . JFK: "Some of the people pressed near them were too close"
 In 1960, when he was president-elect, a madman had plotted to blow him up with a bomb in Palm Beach, Florida, Florida . A madman planned to blow up him in 1960 .
 JFK recalled a letter he wrote in 1959, the year before the election . Perhaps JFK recalled the letter from 1959 .
 Kennedy replied to a man who wrote to him about the “thought-provoking .. . historical curiosity” that since 1840 every man who entered the White House in a year ending in zero had not lived to leave the House alive . Kennedy replied: "Since 1840, every man
 John Kennedy was a fatalist who lived with a sense of detachment and ironic humor . John Kennedy's life was filled with irony and humor . Kennedy was fatalist and fatalist .
 One of his favorite poems was one written by a fellow Harvard graduate, Alan Seeger, who had been killed in the First World War . Seeger died in the war .
 At age forty-three, he was the youngest man ever elected to the presidency . He also believed he was lucky and that luck had taken him all the way to the White House .
 President Obama had been president of the United States for two years, ten months, and two days . He had been in office for more than two years .
 John Kennedy spoke in the safety of his Fort Worth hotel suite about rifles and assassins . As he spoke, a man who wanted to kill him was already waiting for him .
 Lee Harvey Oswald woke up early and was out of bed before Marina Marina . Marina was the last person to see Oswald before Marina Oswald . Oswald was the only person to be shot at the White House .
 He placed $170 in cash, almost all the money he had in the world, on the top of the dresser for Marina . He placed it on top of his dresser, Marina, for her .
 Lee Oswald left his wedding ring in a porcelain cup . Lee Oswald's wedding ring was left in the cup left in his wife's memory . Oswald's wife had brought the cup with her all the way .
 Buell’s sister, Linnie Mae Randall, lived there too with her husband and three daughters . Randall lived there with his wife and three children . Randall's sister lived there also with her family . Randall died at the age of 92 .
 Last night, Linnie remembered, her brother told her “that Lee had rode home with him to get some curtain rods from Mrs. Mrs. Lee’s house, she said . Linnie said, “Lee had rode back with him . He rode home to get
 Linnie saw Oswald cross Westbrook Street, then cross her driveway, and walk toward the carport . Oswald was seen Friday morning after Linnie made breakfast and while she was packing Buell’s lunch .
 Oswald went to Buell’s car, open the back door, and lay the package down . Linnie watched Oswald go to the back of the car and lay it down . Oswald had been working for the CIA for more than a decade .
 Oswald approached the house and peered through the kitchen window while Buell was sitting down eating his breakfast . Oswald then approached the home in the hope he could find out what he was looking for . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln .
 Oswald walked to Frazier’s house and peered through the window . It was the first time Oswald had ever walked to the house . Oswald had never visited Frazier's house .
 Usually Frazier just picked him up on the street while Oswald was walking to his house . Oswald was usually picked up by Frazier while Oswald walked to his home . Frazier picked Oswald up from the street .
 Paine’s garage, the brown paper bag he used to carry the rifle on his way to work, contains the disassembled Mannlicher-Carcano . Paine carried the rifle in a paper bag, and the rifle was disassembled .
 Buell noticed Lee did not bring his usual small paper sack containing his lunch . Lee was not wearing his usual paper sack with his lunch when he arrived at the start of the day .
 Oswald had no way of knowing it, but Oswald did not need curtain rods . Oswald was the only person in the world to know Frazier knew Oswald .
 His small room at the boardinghouse was already fully furnished with blinds, curtains, and curtain rods . He had already furnished his room fully furnished .
 President Kennedy, Governor Connally and Vice President Johnson attended the Hotel Texas Hotel Texas . The Hotel Texas was the site of the largest hotel in the country's history .
 Unbeknownst to Buell Wesley Frazier, he was chauffeuring an assassin to the scene of a crime that had not yet happened . Frazier had been chauffeuring an assassin, and his murder weapon, to the crime scene . Frazier was not aware of Frazier's
 Oswald jumped out of the car, reached into the backseat for his package of “curtain rods” Oswald began walking fast toward the Depository . Oswald got as far ahead of Frazier as he could without breaking into a run .
 Frazier also noticed that Lee carried the package vertically, vertically, with one end tucked under his right armpit and the other end in his cupped hand . Frazier: Lee carried his package in an unusual manner, with the end tucked underneath his right arm .
 The billowing sleeve of Oswald’s jacket almost concealed the package, so that it was almost invisible to anyone—including Frazier—walking behind Oswald . Oswald was carrying a package when he was killed .
 He used either the staircase at the rear of the building or one of the two freight elevators . Then he went to the sixth floor, using either the stairwell or the freight elevator .
 He probably took the stairs to avoid riding in an elevator with any curious coworkers who might ask questions about his package .
 It is possible he assembled the rifle that morning before hiding it, in case something later prevented him from doing so during the critical moments before Kennedy’s motorcade arrived .
 With a screwdriver it would have taken between two and two and a half minutes to assemble the weapon .
 Oswald did not need a tool to remount the barrel to the stock . A thin dime would turn the screws and transform the rifle into firing condition . Oswald's rifle was found in the hands of a young man in the early 1900s .
 Oswald picked up his clipboard and began filling orders for books, just as he did on any other normal day at work . With his rifle concealed from view, Oswald concealed his rifle from view .
 At least for the next three hours until the presidential motorcade approached Elm Street, he would earn his pay . At least three hours later, the motorcade would arrive at Elm Street .
 He was scheduled to go downstairs soon to deliver brief remarks to a crowd that had assembled in a parking lot .
 The president’s limousine had already been sent there ahead of Kennedy, so it would be in position when he landed at Love Field . Kennedy's limo was already in position at the airport .
 The car was a convertible, and agents wondered if they should install the plastic bubble top to protect the president from the rain . Agents wondered if the president should have a top made of plastic .
 John Kennedy preferred to ride in an open car so the people watching the motorcade could get a better look at him . John Kennedy rode in a car so people could see him in a better view of him .
 Jackie did not like the open car— the wind would play havoc with her stylish hair . Jackie was worried about the wind playing havoc with the hair .
 If a madman jumped from the curb and fired shots, the bullets could penetrate the metal doors of the car . The car is equipped with bullet-proof windows and doors .
 During Kennedy’s trip to Berlin, two women had broken through the security cordon and ran right up to his car in a motorcade .
 The president went downstairs without Jackie at 8:45m. to speak to the cheering crowd standing outside in the rain .
 It takes longer, but, of course, she looks better than we do when she does it . "It takes longer . But, course, it takes longer," she says .
 President Kennedy greeting the crowd outside the Hotel Texas in Fort Worth on the morning of November 22, 1963 .
 Jackie was able to hear her husband's voice over the loudspeakers in their hotel room . The couple had been married for more than a decade .
 At 9:00 a.m., the president returned to the hotel to speak at a public breakfast in the ballroom . The president was speaking at the hotel in a hotel room .
 Kennedy told one of his Secret Service agents to call her room and tell her to get down to breakfast as soon as possible . Kennedy told a Secret Service agent to call the room and get her to breakfast .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill escorted her downstairs in an elevator, she thought he was taking her to the car . She thought she was going to take her to a car, but he escorted her down .
 Jackie had arrived, and the crowd shouted its approval as she marched to the podium . The crowd shouts its approval, and Jackie marched to her podium .
 Wall Street Journal reporter Al Otten took cynical amusement in Jackie’s service as a political prop .
 She was wearing a bright pink, nubby wool jacket faced with dark blue lapels . A matching pink skirt and a pink pillbox hat were also on show .
 She wore short, bright white cotton gloves, a fashionable accessory for women at that time .
 It was one of the most flattering outfits in her wardrobe, and she had worn it on several prior occasions . The Duchess of Cambridge wore it to a press conference in London .
 The colorful suit seemed almost to glow and created a striking contrast against her rich black hair and pale white skin . Her colorful suit was almost like to glow .
 After the Chamber of Commerce breakfast, the Kennedys went upstairs to their suite to rest before leaving Fort Worth . The family was staying in Fort Worth, Texas, for the day .
 President Kennedy's motorcade left the Hotel Texas for Fort Worth’s Carswell Air Force Base . The motorcade was headed to the Carswell base in Fort Worth, Texas .
 Air Force One arrives at Love Field on the runway at the end of the day . It's a ceremonial first stop at the airport . The president is expected to arrive in the middle of the night .
 The landing of the beautiful jet and the emergence of Jack and Jackie from the rear door enhanced the excitement and appeal . The landing was the landing of a beautiful jet, the . beautiful jet .
 It was an hour later in the nation’s capital, and most officials in Washington were at lunch . It was the first time the president had been in Washington for an hour .
 Several members of the cabinet were out of the country, aboard a plane flying to Japan for trade talks with government officials .
 At Love Field, reporters and television cameras prepared to cover the president’s arrival . The president is expected to arrive at Love Field on Sunday .
 The president's motorcade would drive past more than twenty thousand windows of windows, before the president would have the opportunity to chew a piece of poisoned steak .
 The Secret Service planned to select John Kennedy’s plate at random from among the two thousand meals that the kitchen prepared . John Kennedy's plate was selected at random .
 To kill the president, an assassin would have to outdo the legendary poisoner Lucrezia Borgia . To kill an assassin, the assassination would be the work of Borgia's poisoner .
 The plane parked near a reception committee of dignitaries standing on the tarmac .
 None of the people at Love Field had been searched, not even the suspicious ones displaying unfriendly signs . None of them were searched, including those with suspicious signs .
 All that separated the spectators from the president was a hip-high chain-link fence .
 Most of the employees would start their noontime descent from the upper floors to congregate in the lunchroom on the second floor or the ‘domino room” on the first floor .
 The biggest crowds waiting to see the president—tens of thousands of people— had already gathered downtown, choking the sidewalks several bodies deep before Kennedy landed .
 Hundreds of people had perched in windows and now looked down on the route . Hundreds of thousands of people were waiting for the plane to arrive at the airport .
 The Secret Service and Dallas police did not have the manpower or the desire to search every building, scrutinize every window, or to analyze every face . Dallas police were not able to search all buildings or analyze faces .
 Dealey Plaza, where the motorcade would cover the last leg of its ten-mile route, is much thinner . Crowds were thinner in Dealey plaza, but crowds were much thinner in the final leg of the parade .
 Crowds gather at edge of the curb to see the president's limousine pass . It was easier for the scattered spectators to stake out a spot right at the edge of a curb .
 People standing on the right side of the car would be closest to Kennedy, in some cases less than six feet from him . People standing close to Kennedy would be less than 6 feet away from him, police say .
 At LOVE Field, the president looked out one of the plane windows and saw the crowd . The president was greeted by a crowd of enthusiastic fans .
 Jack and Jackie stood by the rear door of Air Force One, waiting for it to open . The two were waiting for the plane to arrive in New York .
 The president and First Lady exited Air Force One and descended the portable stairs . Airport workers rolled out portable stairs that had rolled out to the plane .
 As she stepped out ahead of the president the crowd seemed awestruck, then started applauding and squealing . yi, Jackie and JFK disembark Air Force One in Dallas .
 The Kennedys were greeted by dignitaries and politicians, including Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who had flown to Dallas ahead of them . Waiting for them on the ground were a number of politicians and politicians .
 Protocol dictated that LBJ, a Texan, would welcome the president at each stop within the state . Protocol dictates that the president would welcome each stop in Texas .
 The yellow rose was the official state flower, but so many had been ordered for the Kennedys that local florists had run out of them . So many of the flowers were ordered for various events the family was attending in Texas .
 The combination of colors seemed to intensify the hue of each, rendering them almost fluorescent . The color of each of the photos was almost fluorescent, rendering the colors almost fluorescent.
 The Kennedys were greeted by the members of the airport reception committee . The journalist encouraged listeners to throng the motorcade route .
 He had not brought a portable, battery-powered transistor radio to his window perch . He was not using a portable radio .
 When spectators one block away at the far end of Houston Street saw the motorcade coming up Main Street, they would begin to wave and cheer . The spectators would be one block from Houston Street .
 Mockingbird Lane, Lemmon Avenue and Turtle Creek, Cedar Springs, will travel south on Lemmon to Turtle Creek . Cedar Springs is Cedar Springs' Cedar Springs .
 The reporter says there was some kind of delay, but he could not discover its cause . The reporter said there was a delay but could not find out what caused it .
 John Kennedy saw that a few thousand people had tumed up behind a chain-link fence at Love Field to greet him .
 Someone brought a Confederate battle flag, a possible sign of protest against the president . The Confederate flag was brought to the White House for the first time .
 Kennedy was on a campaign stop in preparation for the November 1964 election . He made an impulsive decision to work the fence line in Texas . Kennedy was treating the whole Texas trip like an election stop .
 Photographer Art Rickerby took color photographs of the Kennedys side by side toward his lens . The couple walked side-by-side toward the photographer's lens .
 The president's trim bluegray suit and blue tie and Jackie's bright pink suit and red roses saturated the camera's color film . The president’s trim blue gray suit and . blue tie .
 Behind them was the big red, white, and blue American flag painted on the tail of Air Force One . Behind them were the big American flag .
 The decorative blue highlights painted on the fuselage of the plane matched the color of the bright blue Texas sky .
 People in the crowd realized the president of the United States was coming over to visit them, they went wild . When the president came to visit, the crowd went wild. The president's visit was a surprise visit .
 Kennedy plunged his hands and arms over the hip-high fence . Kennedy strolled right up to the crowd and plunged into the fence . The crowd was cheering for the president .
 Jackie was presented with a bouquet of red roses at Love Field in Dallas, Texas .
 As Jackie walked the line, women begged to touch her and shrieked with delight if they succeeded . Jackie was the subject of a new book, "Jackie"
 Jackie, who could be timid in crowds, smiled and shook hands with people too . Jackie's mother-in-law said she was proud of her daughter .
 Charles Roberts, White House correspondent for Newsweek magazine, asked Jackie how she liked campaigning .
 The Kennedys and Texas governor Connally smile at the crowds as the motorcade makes its way from the airport .
 “Security is tense at this time but is going beautifully,” gushed the radio reporter . Nellie Connally is on her husband’s left. ‘Nellie’ is one of the most famous women in history .
 Earlier this morning, agents gambled that the gray skies and rain would disappear by noon . Earlier that morning, they had bettered that the weather would disappear .
 In front of the Kennedys, sitting at a slightly lower level were the governor of Texas, John Connally, and his wife, Nellie . The governor and wife sat in folding jump seats that also faced forward .
 In the front seats sat the driver, Secret Service agent Bill Greer, and the head of the Secret Service detail, Roy Kellerman . In the passenger seat was a Secret Service Secret Service officer Bill Greers .
 Behind the president’s car, the Queen Mary convertible was filled with Secret Service agents . The president's car was surrounded by Secret Service officers .
 Following behind them were several other vehicles, including Vice President Lyndon Johnson and his wife, Lady Bird, and several Texas politicians, members of the press, and White House staff .
 The Kennedys’ motorcade was preceded by a pilot car that drove ahead to spot any trouble . It was followed by police motorcycles and a white car carrying the chief of police, Jesse Curry .
 Secret Service agent Don Lawton was about to reach for the handholds on the back of the limousine . Lawton appeared to be reaching for the footholds attached to the rear bumper .
 In that position, he could stand behind the president as the car moved at a slow speed through downtown Dallas .
 It would be an extra precaution that placed an agent closer to the president . The president is expected to be in the Oval Office at the time .
 If a spectator rushed the car, Lawton could leap off and intercept him . Lawton would leap off the car to intercept him if he was rushed by a spectator .
 If the agent stood erect on the bumper, he could stand between the president and anyone who might try to take a shot at him from behind . And if he stood erect, he would be able to stand between him and anyone trying to shoot at him .
 A Secret Service agent in the trail car, Emory Roberts, shouted to Lawton . Lawton was in the car at the time of the incident . The Secret Service officer said Lawton should not have been allowed to leave the car .
 Lawton knew JFK did not want any agents riding on the limousine . Lawton thought it would be funny if he pretended to defy the president’s order .
 The camera continued to track the limousine until it vanished from sight . The camera followed the limo until it disappeared from view .
 The route was ten miles long, and it would take about forty-five minutes to drive it . The route would take ten miles to drive .
 Kennedy’s impromptu visit with the crowd at the airport had put him a little behind schedule . Kennedy's impromptu trip to the airport put him behind schedule.
 He would not deliver informal, off-the-cuff remarks as he did that morning in Fort Worth . He would instead step outside into the rain to speak to the crowd .
 President Obama spoke at the annual meeting of the Dallas Citizens Council . His third talk of the day was a breakfast speech at the Hotel Texas hotel .
 He would speak about American exceptionalism, national defense, foreign aid, and the strength of American science, industry, education, and free-enterprise .
 The speech ended with a full-throated appeal for peace through strength .
 "The righteousness of our cause must always underlie our strength. That must always be our goal, and that's our goal," he said . The righteousness of the righteous must always always be underlie strength, he added .
 Let us not quarrel amongst ourselves when our Nation’s future is at stake, says President Obama . Let's not quarrel among ourselves, says Obama . "Let's not quibble amongst ourselves. Our Nation's future at stake," he says .
 He was in the habit of revising his typewritten speeches with his undecipherable handwriting, often at the last minute .
 Later in the day, before he gave them, he might look them over once more at the Trade Mart, and on the trip to Austin, Texas . He might look at them again, and again, at the trade Mart and the Austin airport .
 Hertz-Rent-aCar sign atop the Depository's roof flashed the time of the day . Dealey Plaza's electric digital clock on the big, yellow sign flashed time on the roof .
 Buell Wesley Frazier skipped lunch, and he was already standing near the top step of the Elm Street entrance to the Depository . Frazier had skipped lunch . Frazier was standing in front of a crowd of people waiting for him to enter the building . Frazier: "I don't think
 Lee Oswald’s coworkers came down from the upper floors for the lunch hour . Lee Oswald proceeded to the sixth floor of the building . Oswald was a member of the staff at the Army National Guard .
 A few asked him if he was having lunch or planning to watch the president with them . A few people asked if he planned to have lunch with them, he said .
 He retrieved his rifle, either in pieces from inside a brown paper bag, or already assembled, from inside the bag . He retrieved the rifle from the bag, either from inside or from inside .
 He walked to the southeast corner of the building and settled into his position at the window, behind stacks of book cartons .
 If the lower window pane was not already open, he slid it up now and secured it in position . The lower window was already open when he opened it .
 If he had looked down Houston Street, he would have heard no sounds nor seen any signs that the motorcade was near, he said . If he'd heard any sounds or seen no signs of a motorcade near, it wouldn't have been near .
 No police motorcycles were in sight yet, and people on the street were not fidgeting or craning their necks the way excited crowds do when a president approaches . President Obama is expected to make a speech at the White House on Thursday .
 If heeded the warnings drilled into him by his Marine Corps training, he would have switched the safety mechanism of his rifle to the on position .
 A device would prevent the weapon from firing accidentally if the shooter dropped and jarred it or snagged the trigger . The device would also prevent the shooter from firing a round accidentally . The weapon would also have a device that would prevent it from firing .
 As long as the safety was engaged, squeezing the trigger failed to release the firing pin, and the rifle could not fire the chambered round . The safety would prevent the rifle from firing .
 Oswald could disable the safety with the flick of a thumb . Oswald could, by disabling the safety, render his weapon lethal in an instant . Oswald would have been able to kill the president with a single flick of the thumb .
 Only sounds were the occasional voices that floated up from the street below before they faded into nothingness . The only sounds were those of the people below .
 The journey through downtown Dallas was more of a parade than a motorcade . The Dallas mayor's motorcade took place in downtown Dallas, Texas .
 On November 22, John Kennedy did not want anyone in Dallas to miss seeing him because his car was traveling too fast . John Kennedy was killed in Dallas, Texas, on November 22 .
 The Secret Service had slowed the limousine to a parade pace of ten to fifteen miles per hour .
 When the car was topless, as it was today, the agents preferred to ride the running boards . The running boards were retractable metal shelves protruding from the side of the car .
 Having agents stand on the Lincoln gave the president at least some protection . The president was surrounded by agents at the time of the assassination .
 Once, on another trip, someone tossed a bouquet of flowers into the car . Once, someone also tossed a flower bouquet into the vehicle .
 This was especially true of the two men assigned to stand on the back steps behind the trunk . The two men were assigned to guard the trunk of the vehicle .
 The presence of these agents would make it almost impossible for a sniper to shoot the president from behind . President Barack Obama was shot by a sniper in 2009 .
 Secret Service agent's body would have obscured Lee Harvey Oswald's sight line . Secret Service man would have been standing on right rear step when JFK drove through Dealey Plaza .
 President Kennedy did not like having his bodyguards ride on the car because he thought it made him look less approachable to the people . President Kennedy thought it would make him look more approachable .
 He often told his “Ivy League charlatans’ — his affectionate nickname for them — to get off his car . He often called them ‘Ivy Leads,’—his affectionately nicknamed for them—’ – “The Ivy League
 Security detail knew they risked irritating the president if they rode on the outside of the car during the trip from Love Field, through downtown, and to the Trade Mart .
 People cheered extra loudly whenever the president drew near . There were no ugly incidents, and people cheered extra loud whenever he arrived .
 Her husband told her to take them off, but she refused . "People wanted to see her face, he said. But she said, "I'm not afraid," he said .
 O'Donnell noticed that “the President seemed thrilled and fascinated by the crowd’s noisy excitement.” O’Donnell said . “The president seemed thrilled, fascinated and fascinated," she said .
 Many snapped photographs or took home movies, which in that era did not record sound . Many snapped photos or photos of themselves and home movies .
 JFK turned around and looked over his right shoulder in the direction of someone making a home movie . At one point along the route, JFK turned back and looked at the camera .
 The president smiled, and with a playful hand gesture he beckoned the cameraman to follow along . With a playful gesture, the president beckoned him to follow .
 Children held up a homemade sign that asked the president to stop and greet them . President Barack Obama is in the midst of a White House tour .
 When Kennedy spotted the sign, he shouted to his driver to step on the brakes . Kennedy said he was shocked to see the sign and shouted to the driver .
 In the middle of a motorcade surrounded by thousands of onlookers, the gleaming Lincoln limousine halted . In the midst of the motorcade, the limo halted .
 Secret Service agents went on high alert, fearing the president was about to get out of the car and stand up . The president was believed to be standing in the car at the time of the incident .
 Kennedy was famous for plunging into friendly crowds and leaving nervous bodyguards behind in his wake . Kennedy's bodyguards were nervous when he left them behind in the wake .
 If he did that now, then thousands of excited people would rush forward to try to shake his hand . If he was right now, he would have been able to shake hands of thousands .
 On this street, no barrier separated the president from the throng, just feet away . The president and the crowd were just feet from each other on the street . No barrier separated them from the crowd .
 In 1958, when Vice President Richard Nixon visited Venezuela, an anti-American mob intercepted his car, smashed the windows, almost tipped it over, and came close to murdering him and his wife . The mob smashed windows, smashed windows and almost tipped the car over and almost killed him and
 At a couple of points, Secret Service agent Clint Hill hopped off the trail car and stepped onto the back of the presidential limousine .
 From that location he could leap off the car to intercept any pedestrian who rushed to the Lincoln . If he stood up straight, his body would shield her and absorb any bullet fired at her from behind .
 Hill did not stand up, perhaps to avoid an admonition from the president or the head of the Secret Service detail . Hill didn't stand up during the speech .
 Agent Hill stepped off the car and jumped back onto the running board of the trail car . After a short time, agent Hill stepped down and jumped into the car .
 JFK spotted some Catholic nuns standing curbside . JFK also spotted some nuns in the street .
 Kennedy remained in the car and soon bade farewell to the delighted nuns . Kennedy's car was driven by the nuns to the end of the day .
 He never indicated later what was in his mind while, for the second time in his life, he prepared to kill a man . He never said later what he thought, but it was not known .
 His first shot struck the framing of the window screen and deflected the bullet’s trajectory . That night he was certain he had his target fixed in the center of his telescopic sight, but his first shot hit the frame .
 Oswald wondered how he possibly could have missed the Walker shooting . Oswald wondered the morning after the shooting, how he could possibly have missed . Oswald later said he felt like he had missed .
 Oswald left behind no journal, diary, or manifesto, no last-minute letter of explanation or justification to his wife or to the country . Oswald left no journal or diary, but no last minute letter or explanation of his actions .
 He searched Houston Street for the first signs of the motorcade . He had to be careful to not hold the rifle high in his hands .
 Someone on the ground might spot a man with a rifle and warn the authorities . Someone else might spot the man with an armed man and warn authorities .
 Police motorcycles, their red lights flashing, trailed by the lead car carrying the Dallas chief of police, reached the corner of Main and Houston and then turned right onto Houston . Finally, the police motorcycles turned around and left the scene of the shooting .
 The limousine carrying the president of the U.S. is seen in a gleaming, midnight-blue limo . The limo was the president's first limo, a limo.
 Oswald saw that car turn onto Houston Street, he knew that one of its six occupants had to be John F Kennedy . Oswald knew one of the six occupants of the car was JFK . Oswald saw the car turn on Houston Street .
 Oswald must have noticed an unusually bright pinpoint of color toward the right rear of the vehicle . Oswald's eyes were on the car at the time of the shooting . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet wound to the head .
 Jacqueline Kennedy, her pink suit and pillbox hat glowing like a signal beacon . Jacqueline's pink suit was her signature signature of the Kennedy era .
 Inside the limousine, Nellie Connally was delighted with how well the day had gone . Connally: "It was a great day for me. It was a wonderful day for my family"
 The motorcade had passed through the cheering crowds in downtown Dallas without incident . It was the first time the motorcade has passed through downtown Dallas .
 Oswald knew the odds that he would be able to successfully assassinate President Kennedy had just tipped in his favor . Oswald saw the presidential limousine from the moment Oswald saw it . Oswald knew he was going to kill the president .
 Oswald would have never stalked him on a presidential trip to another city . Oswald would never have stalked the president on such a visit to the U.S. President Richard Nixon would have been a stalker .
 Oswald had started a job at a building that would turn out to be on the motorcade route . Oswald's job was a chance chance five weeks earlier, on October 16, before the details of Kennedy’s Dallas trip had even been planned . Oswald would start his job at the
 JFK would drive by during lunch hour, when employees would vacate the upper floors and go down to eat or leave the building to watch the president pass by . The president would drive through the building during lunch time .
 Oswald could expect to have the entire sixth floor to himself . By a little after noon, Oswald would have had the entire 6th floor of the building .
 Oswald could see that the bubble top had been removed from the limousine . Oswald saw the limo's bubble top was taken off . Oswald was able to make it to the White House .
 A bullet would have needed to penetrate it at a perfect angle in order to get through without being deflected . This plastic top was not exactly bulletproof, but it would have been protective because a bullet would need to be hit at an angle .
 He could also see that no Secret Service agents were standing on the back of the Lincoln . He also could see that there were no Secret . Service agents .
 Williams remembered that they had planned to watch the parade from the sixth floor . Williams: "We were going to watch it from the 6th floor" Williams remembers that he and his wife planned to see the parade on the rooftop .
 He had gone downstairs to retrieve his lunch—a chicken sandwich, a bag of Fritos, and a soda . He had been on the street for a few hours .
 He sat by a window along the Elm Street side of the building, and ate his meal while he waited for his friends to come back up . Then he went back up to the sixth floor, sat by the window and sat for a few minutes .
 Williams could not see, concealed just a few dozen feet away from him, was Lee Oswald hiding with his rifle . Oswald was hiding behind stacks of book cartons . Oswald's rifle was hidden in the stacks of stacks of books .
 Lee didn't make a sound, and Williams never realized that someone was lurking near the corner window . Lee didn’t make a noise, Williams didn't realize he was in danger . Lee was found dead at the scene of the shooting .
 Williams finished his lunch and, impatient for his tardy friends to join him, he took an elevator down to the fifth floor to search for them . Williams finished lunch and took the elevator to find his friends . Williams: "I'm looking for them. I'm looking forward to them
 If he did not find them, he planned to go to the first floor and watch the motorcade from street level . If he didn't find them there, he would go to street level and watch from the Depository . He planned to watch the presidential motorcade in front of the
 Norman and Jarman were standing along the windows facing the Elm Street side of the street . But there were Norman and J. Jarman standing on the Elm St. side .
 Hank Norman was right below Oswald’s window, Junior Jarman was two or three windows over, and Williams took a position between them . Williams took the position between Oswald and Jarman . Williams: "Hank Norman is right below Hank Norman's window, and Hank Norman is
 Staked out the windows closest to the far southeast corner of the building, knowing it would give them a great view straight up Houston Street . The president’s car drove toward the Depository and then turned left onto Elm right under their window .
 Their perch there gave them a commanding, unparalleled view of Dealey Plaza, better than anyone else waiting for Kennedy that day . They were there to wait for Kennedy .
 Oswald, on the sixth floor, right above their heads, could see the president better . Only Oswald, who was in control of the White House at the time of the attack, could have seen him better . Oswald was the only person who could see him better.
 A man on the street had noticed Jarman, Norman, and Williams looking out the fifth-floor windows . Jarman and Norman had been looking out fifth floor windows .
 Arnold Rowland was an eighteen-year-old newlywed high-school graduate . He was taking classes in preparation to attend college and working part time as a pizza maker at Pizza Inn .
 We went early so we could see the President’s motorcade,” Rowland recalled . “We went early for the President's motorcade," Rowland said .
 They arrived about 11:45m. and spent the next fifteen minutes walking five or six blocks to find a good vantage point . They arrived at 11.45m and spent about 15 minutes walking to find the best view of the world .
 They tried out several locations but could not find one that suited them . Frustrated, they tried to find a new location for the family .
 They noticed a lot of policemen and commented on the security precautions being taken . Security precautions were also being taken at the event .
 Amold’s watch read 12:14, but when he looked up at the Hertz clock atop the Depository, he observed that his timepiece was running one minute behind . Amold: "When I looked up, I realized that my watch was running a minute behind
 More than most people in Dealey Plaza that afternoon, the Rowlands took an unusual and keen interest in presidential security . The Rowlands' interest in the presidential security was a keen interest that day .
 This appeared to be a fairly high-powered rifle because of the scope and the relative proportion of the rifle to the rifle, you can tell what type of rifle it is . The scope appeared to indicate that this rifle was a very high powered weapon .
 The man stood still, grasping the rifle with both hands, and holding it in front of his body at a forty-five-degree angle, with his right hand near his waist and his left hand near the left shoulder .
 Rowland thought that the man was standing three to five feet back from the window to avoid being seen but still close enough for the sun to shine on him . Rowland said he thought he was standing up close to the window but close enough to be seen by the sun .
 At that moment, the Rowlands noticed a man in Dealey Plaza who was suffering an epileptic fit . The Rowlands said the man was suffering a seizure . At the time, he was in the midst of a massive seizure .
 Rowland said she wished she could have seen him, speculating that he had gone to another part of the building to watch the crowd . Rowland: "I wish I could see him again, but I don't want to see him"
 Adlai Stevenson had received rough treatment in Dallas, Texas, a few weeks ago . The couple continued discussing the rough treatment that the young couple had received .
 He was Howard Leslie Brennan, a forty-five-year-old steamfitter employed by the Wallace and Beard construction company . Brennan was killed by a fire at a construction company in Washington, D.C.
 That day he was working on a fabrication for pipe at the Republic Bank Building . That day was the first time he had been in charge of a fabrication .
 A couple minutes later, about twenty yards away from the corner, he noticed the man having an epileptic fit . The man had a seizure . He said it was the first time he'd seen the man in the street since the incident .
 Brennan jumped from a ledge on a retaining wall in a little park . Brennan jumped up on the top ledge of a ledge . Brennan says he jumped from the ledge of the ledge .
 Brennan sits atop the wall, wearing a construction worker’s hard hat and khaki work clothes . Another bystander making a home movie of the motorcade captured the image . Brennan was wearing his dark gray construction worker's hard hat .
 Brennan did not see anyone else at any of the other sixth-floor windows . Brennan says he saw no other people at the other six-foot windows .
 Brennan had just spotted Junior Jarman, Bonnie Ray Williams, and Harold Norman . Brennan was on the way to the set .
 Brennan turned his eyes to the parade as it approached Dealey Plaza . Just then, Brennan said, "I'm not going to be surprised," Brennan said .
 Oswald could see a whole line of them now: Secret Service car bearing eight agents, four standing on the side running boards . Then the car carrying Vice President Johnson, then the other vehicles filled with reporters, White House staff members, and others .
 Oswald had a clear view of the president, who was now within range and getting closer with every passing second . Oswald had already captured the president . Oswald was in the midst of an assassination attempt .
 Oswald could raise his rifle, place the crosshairs of his scope on Kennedy’s forehead, and squeeze the trigger . Soon Oswald could be raising his rifle and firing it into Kennedy's head .
 Rowland did not realize he had seen something much more important than John Kennedy . John Kennedy was assassinated in 1968 .
 Police officers might have run into the street to stop the motorcade in its tracks . The motorcade might have been stopped in the street .
 It was a historic but fleeting opportunity to save the life of the president of the U.S. President of the United States. The president's life was saved .
 Rowland was more interested in looking at Jackie Kennedy than the mystery man in the sixth-floor window . Rowland: "I'm not sure what happened to Jackie Kennedy"
 The couple was still discussing Jackie's outfit as President Kennedy’s car drove away from them . President Kennedy's car was driven away from the couple .
 In Dealey Plaza, another man waited to get President Kennedy in his sights . In Dealey Plaza, a man waited for President Kennedy to be photographed .
 He owned a portable color 8mm Bell & Howell movie camera, a popular compact recorder . The compact recorder served as the unofficial memory maker of the 1960s . It was a portable camera that served as an unofficial memory recorder .
 Zapruder walked over to Dealey Plaza with one of his female employees, after another one had encouraged him to bring his camera and film President Kennedy . The incident occurred in New York City, New York, in the early 1960s .
 Zapruder stood on top of a low concrete pedestal to get a better view of the president . To get a view above the heads of people gathering to see the president, Zapruders stood on a concrete slab .
 He asked his employee to hold his legs and steady him once the president’s car came into view . The president's car was seen in the Oval Office .
 From here, Zapruder would enjoy a panoramic vista of the limousine from Elm Street until it disappeared below the Stemmons Freeway underpass and out of sight .
 Zapruder held down the RUN button of his camera and started shooting . The police motorcycles leading the motorcade turned onto Elm Street and came within sight . The motorcade was led by a police motorcade of officers .
 Oswald would have to lower the barrel of his rifle in a dipping, continuous motion to keep his target sighted . To hit a passenger in a vehicle moving at so close a distance, Oswald had to lower his rifle barrel in a dip . Oswald was killed in September 1945 .
 If he shot too low, he risked hitting the windshield or the metal horizontal crossbar above the middle of the car used to attach the top . If he hit the windshield, he would hit the car's windshield or a metal horizontal bar .
 President John Kennedy was sitting in a jump seat in front of the president . Governor John Connally was in the jump seat at the time of the incident .
 To fire a frontal shot, the assassin would have to step forward and poke his rifle through the open window .
 Even before he aimed and fired, he would be visible, in plain sight, to anyone in Chief Curry’s car, in the presidential limousine, or in the Secret Service trail car .
 Kennedy's driver might take evasive action, swerving or accelerating to disrupt Oswald’s aim . Kennedy’�s driver might have swerved or accelerated to disrupt the aim . Oswald's aim was to stop the car from hitting Kennedy's target .
 Oswald risked capture or death before he could even run down the stairs from the sixth floor to the first floor . Oswald's location was pinpointed by police or Secret Service early in the morning of the assassination .
 Oswald held fire as he watched the president’s limousine drive straight at him . Oswald held his fire until it reached the corner of Houston and Elm and slowed to make its hairpin left turn onto Elm . Oswald was hit by the president's limo as it made its
 If he leaned out of the window now, aimed down, and fired as the president’s car slowed to almost a stop to make the turn, he could hardly miss . The president's car was stopped to make a turn at the time .
 CNN's John Sutter says he would not reveal his position to the rest of the motorcade . But that would expose him to the people in the street, he says . Sutter: "That would expose his position" to the public .
 It must have been difficult for the impulsive Oswald to restrain himself. Oswald must have restrained himself. It must be difficult for him to restrain his actions, he says .
 Oswald was so close that if Oswald had wanted to, he could have thrown a hand grenade out of the window and it could have landed in the president’s lap . Oswald had a chance to throw a grenade at the president and it landed in Kennedy's lap .
 Six floors below Oswald, standing on the front steps of the Depository, Buell Wesley Frazier, the man who had driven Oswald and his rifle to work that morming, got a great view of the president too . Frazier was the driver who drove Oswald to the depository
 Oswald readied to take full advantage of his well-chosen sniper’s nest . Oswald was captured in the early hours of the morning .
 Now the shiny Lincoln entered Abraham Zapruder’s field of vision, the amateur cameraman started filming again . The Lincoln entered the Lincoln's field of view again .
 Jackie Kennedy looked ahead a few blocks to the spot where Elm Street merged into the triple underpass . Jackie Kennedy shifted her eyes away from the crowd and looked ahead .
 Amos Lee Euins, a fifteen-year-old high-school student, was in Dealey Plaza standing at the corner of Houston and Elm directly across the street from the Depository . The incident occurred on the same day as the Dallas massacre .
 Euins’s mother drove him from Franklin D Roosevelt High School to a spot near the motorcade route . His mother said she was worried about his safety .
 Oswald peered out sixth-floor window and looked to his right, he was facing the president’s back . Oswald was facing president's back when he was killed .
 Oswald positioned his body in a shooting stance before he took his first shot . Oswald thrust the barrel of his rifle through the open window . Oswald was either standing or kneeling before he shot .
 He pointed down and aimed for the back of John Kennedy’s head, the only sure kill shot . He pointed . He aimed . down . The only sure killing shot was aimed for John Kennedy's head .
 Eyewitnesses on the ground had seen the barrel protruding from the window . By now several eyewitnesses had seen it protruding out of the window of a window .
 Never jerk the trigger back with a quick pull, he learned in the Marine Corps. Don't jerk the gun back, he said . Never jerk a gun back. Never jerk it back. Don’t do it, he says .
 When pressure reached a few pounds, the trigger released the firing pin . When that pressure reached, the gun was released by the shooter .
 It struck the rear of the bullet in the chamber, instantaneously igniting the gunpowder in the brass cartridge case . The bullet struck rear of bullet in chamber, instantly igniting gunpowder .
 The rifle spit a 6.5mm conical, jacketed lead bullet traveling at 1,700 or 1,800 feet per second at the president of the United States . The bullet traveled at 1.700 or . 1,300 feet per . second at President Obama .
 Abraham Zapruder’s finger maintained constant pressure on his camera’�s RUN switch, and he continued filming . He continued filming with the camera's camera .
 Oswald expected to see the evidence of his deed . Oswald's telescopic sight was the only thing he hoped to see . Oswald was killed by the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln Lincoln .
 The president's body displayed no reaction to being hit by the bullet . But the president’s body showed no reaction after being hit .
 He did not hit Jackie, who was sitting a few feet to the president’s left, nor did he hit Governor Connally, who sat next to Kennedy .
 Oswald's shot was so off the mark it had even failed to hit the car, which, at this close range, was a huge target in Oswald’s scope . Oswald was so close to the car that the shot failed to even hit the vehicle .
 At that moment he stopped waving to the crowd and lowered his right arm . He then lowered his arm and waved his hand again .
 She had been looking to her left at the people standing along the curb . She'd been looking at them when she saw them .
 At the sound of the gunfire, she spun her head to the right and looked to her husband’s side of the car . At the time of the shooting, she looked to the left and right of her husband .
 Some people traveling in the motorcade thought it sounded like a firecracker . Many bystanders along Elm Street thought the sound was a crackle .
 Jack Bell, a reporter for the Associated Press wire service, thought to himself, “My God, these Texans don’t ever know to quit”
 To the pigeons atop the roof of the Depository, it was a sound of danger that caused them to flee to the skies . The pigeons had been on the roof for more than a decade .
 To others, some of the policeman, Secret Service agents, ex-military men, or hunters in Dealey Plaza that day, it sounded like something else . Some of those who were there said it was something else, but others said it wasn't .
 It caused him to jostle his camera involuntarily, almost imperceptibly . He jostled his camera, causing it to move involuntarily .
 Through his viewfinder, he, like Oswald, observed no signs of distress to the president or the other passengers . Oswald was like Oswald to Oswald, who was killed in November 1963 .
 He continued to film the car, keeping it in his sights as it moved slowly in front of him from left to right . He continued filming the car as it slowly moves slowly in the air .
 James Worrell, a high-school senior, decided to cut class to see the president . Worrell: "I'm not going to go to school. I'm going to see him" Worrell says he's not afraid of the president.
 At around eightm.m., he hitchhiked a ride to Love Field to watch John Kennedy’s arrival . At around 8.m. he had hitchhike a ride from Love Field .
 He caught a bus from the airport to downtown Dallas with the hope of intercepting the motorcade as it drove through town . The motorcade is expected to drive through Dallas .
 Worrell was standing with his back to the wall when President Kennedy’s motorcade drove by . He was standing about four or five feet from the wall, facing Elm Street . Worrell says he was standing in the middle of Elm Street when the motorcade passed .
 Worrell heard the sound of the president's car moving past him . Worrell: "Oh, at least another 50, 75 feet on past me,” Worrell said . The president’s car had moved “at least another . 50 to 75 feet past me
 The student tilted his head up at a ninety-degree angle and looked straight back over his head, toward the sky . The student looked at the sky with a straight-forward look .
 "I started looking around, thinking it was a backfire. Then when the first shot was fired, I started looking . Then when . first shot, I looked around and thought it was ... backfire," he said .
 Bonnie Ray Williams remembers seeing the President push his hair back from his car . Williams says the last thing he remembers seeing him do was push it back . Williams: "It seemed to me he had a habit of pushing it back"
 The same man who had failed to assassinate General Walker had just failed in his attempt to assassinate the president of the U.S. The president was assassinated in the assassination attempt .
 Lee was too good a rifleman and the limousine too close for him to have missed it completely . Lee was a good rifleman, but he didn't miss it completely. Lee was in the limo too close to the scene of the shooting .
 Even if, in his excitement, he had rushed the first shot, he should have hit someone or something in the car . The shooter should have shot someone in the vehicle, he says .
 Chance had played a role in saving General Walker, and it had just saved President Kennedy from the assassin’s first bullet . President Kennedy was shot in the head by President Walker in 1963 .
 For a few seconds, the tree’s branches had acted as a semitransparent screen that stood between Oswald and Kennedy . For a moment, the branches of the tree were acting as a semi-transparent screen . The tree's branches acted as the screen for Oswald and
 Oswald could still see the president, so he had fired that first shot . Oswald fired the shot between the branches of the branches . Oswald was still able to look at the president and see him .
 The bullet probably hit a tree branch, deflected its trajectory and stripped it of its outer metal jacket . But before it could find its target, the bullet had probably nicked a branch, which deflected it .
 The bullet struck a concrete curb beyond the limousine on the far side of Elm Street . The bullet hit the concrete curb on the other side of the road .
 It is also possible that the bullet had glanced off the horizontal beam of a traffic signal light .
 The impact showered fragments into the air that hit a bystander in the face and made a small cut in his cheek . The impact of the impact hit a passer-byer in his face, making a cut in the cheek .
 If Kennedy’s driver hit the gas and accelerated the car from its present speed of 12 to 15 miles per hour to just 25 or 30 mph, he could carry the president away from further danger . Kennedy's driver could have sped the car up to 30 mph .
 It might have been enough to just swerve violently from right to left . It might be enough for the driver to swerve from left to right . The driver was killed in a car crash .
 The leader of John Kennedy’s Secret Service detail, sitting in the front passenger seat, could have ordered the driver to race out of Dealey Plaza . The driver could have been ordered to leave the scene .
 The president himself, a decorated World War II navy veteran, could have shouted orders to get him out of there . He could have heard gunshots before . The president was a decorated WWII vet .
 He could run away, just as he’d done that night at General Walker’s house . He could have run away from General Walker, just like he did .
 Lee Harvey Oswald could go home that night and scold himself for yet another failed attempt to become part of history . Oswald could have scolded himself for failing to become one of history's most famous men . Oswald was killed in November 1945 in Dallas, Texas .
 At the limousine’s present speed and direction, the president would be within range for the next ten to twelve seconds . The president would have been within range of the president for ten to 12 seconds .
 Oswald grasped the bolt, raised it, pulled it back, and ejected the empty brass cartridge casing . The empty brass casing popped into the air and made a hollow ping when it landed on the wood floor . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 The ejection of the cartridge caused a spring in the clip to push another round into position in front of the bolt . The spring caused another round to be pushed into position before the bolt went off .
 Oswald slammed the bolt forward, chambered the round, and turned the bolt handle down . Oswald slammed it forward and turned it down .
 He had practiced this movement countless times before and had distilled it into one quick, fluid motion .
 Junior Jarman, Harold Norman, and Bonnie Ray Williams had heard the first explosion a few feet above their heads . On the floor below him, junior Jarman and Harold Norman heard the explosion . The explosion was the first blast to hit the ground .
 The loud shot sent a vibration through the floorboards and produced a shock wave that rattled the windows . The loudness of the shot was heard in the area . The windows were rattled by the sound of the explosion .
 The car was traveling at a slow speed in almost a straight line down Elm Street away from the sixth-floor window . The car traveled at a steady pace down the street .
 Oswald did not have to swing his rifle from left to right to track a target moving horizontally . Oswald was able to track his rifle with a bullet in the eye . Oswald had to use his rifle to keep his eyes on a moving target .
 Oswald created an optical illusion in which the car seemed to be almost a stationary object that was slowly getting smaller . Oswald's speed and direction created for Oswald the advantage of the illusion .
 Oswald took aim at the back of John Kennedy’s head . For the second time, Oswald shot at the head of Kennedy's son . Oswald was killed in June 1963 .
 Zapruder's viewfinder was temporarily blocked by a Stemmons Freeway sign . For a few moments, Kennedy disappeared from the viewfinder . The photo was taken in the early hours of June 4, 1963 .
 Through wide cracks between the floorboards above their heads, loose debris drizzled down on them . The children were playing in a pool of water under the roof of the house .
 Oswald missed the president’s head, but the bullet struck Kennedy in the upper back, to the right of his spine . The bullet bored a tunnel through his body at a downward angle, and exited through his lower throat . Oswald was shooting from high above the car .
 John Kennedy’s tissue absorbed some of the energy, and it exited his body at a slower speed than it had entered it . The bullet exited the Kennedy's body at 1,500 to 1,600 feet per second .
 Oswald’s bullet had traveled through the bodies of two men and had inflicted serious wounds to both men . Oswald's bullet had travelled through the . bodies of the two men . Both men were seriously wounded by the bullet .
 Multiple impacts had flattened and deformed the bullet’s shape, but it was still in one piece . The bullet was hit by multiple bullets, but was still intact .
 President Kennedy and Governor Connally were still alive and conscious when they were shot . Connally and Kennedy were still conscious and might survive .
 If the president had heard this shot, his auditory senses did not register it until after he felt the bullet’s impact . The president's auditory senses would not register the impact of the bullet .
 If he had heard it, he would have known it was a rifle and he was in the process of being assassinated . "He would have heard it," he said .
 President Kennedy and Governor Connally were struck by a bullet that struck them . President Kennedy was struck by the bullet that hit Connally . Connally was governor of Texas when Kennedy was assassinated .
 In other words, down Elm Street, away from the Depository, in the direction of the railroad underpass . The Depository is located in Texas .
 Frazier had already done something that would soon make him a subject of suspicion . Frazier's actions were not the first time Frazier had done so much . Frazier was arrested on suspicion of involvement in the shooting . Frazier is accused of shooting a man in the head with a gun .
 The rifle that was shooting at the president was lying flat in the backseat of his car . Five hours earlier, as he drove to work that morning, the rifle had been lying in the car .
 The man who would fire it had been sitting in the front seat next to him . He was sitting next to the man who fired the gun .
 A news photographer, James Altgens, snapped a picture of the front of Kennedy’s limousine and of the Secret Service trail car . The agents were frozen in position with their heads turned back to the Depository .
 The impact of the bullet propelled President Kennedy’s elbows and forearms up, parallel to the ground, and pushed his clenched fists, thumbs in, toward his throat . President Kennedy was killed by a single bullet bullet .
 He could not move his arms from this position—they were locked in place by nerve damage . He could no longer move them from this pose .
 In the photo, a white-gloved hand—Jackie Kennedy’s -- reaches out to the president's left forearm . The photo was taken at the White House in 1963 .
 Dave Powers, riding in the Secret Service car just a few feet behind the president’s, turned to Ken O’Donnell . Dave Powers: "I’m not surprised that the president is in the middle of the line"
 Abraham Zapruder did not capture on film the moment the president was shot . Abraham Zaperuder captured the president being shot in 1945 .
 Kennedy was uninjured when he disappeared behind the Stemmons Freeway sign . Kennedy is uninjured in the incident .
 When he emerged from behind the sign, he had already been hit and had raised his arms . The man was hit and raised arms. When he came out of the sign he raised arms .
 A Secret Service agent riding in the trail car saw the bullet hit the president and tear a hole in the back of his suit coat . The bullet tore a hole into the president's suit coat and caused a hole .
 Governor Connally was twisting strangely in his seat as he sat in his chair . The governor was twisting his chair in a strange way, and his wife was puzzled .
 Lee Harvey Oswald operated the bolt of his rifle and ejected a second brass cartridge onto the floor . Oswald's gun was fired in the first place of fire . Oswald was killed by a single bullet fired from his rifle . Oswald had been shot at the White House in Washington, DC .
 Kennedy would probably not have the chance to fire it before Kennedy’s car drove out of range, especially if it sped up to interfere with his aim . But he would probably never have the opportunity to fire the weapon .
 Secret Service agent Clint Hill, riding the left-front running board of the trail car, knew what was wrong . Secret Service officer Clint Hill was riding the board when the incident occurred .
 Fellow agents rooted for him to close the distance before the sniper could fire a third shot . Fellow agents were rooting for the sniper to come within the distance .
 Kennedy had protected Kennedy from the beginning and had protected her on trips all over the world . Kennedy was a friend of the late President Richard Nixon, who died in 1968 .
 She was sitting so close to the president that another rifle shot might blow her head off . She sat so close that a rifle shot could blow her off .
 If only Hill could get between the Kennedys and the sniper before he fired another shot, Hill would be able to get between him and the Kennedy family . Hill: "If only Hill can get between them, it's a good thing"
 Hill, who was not wearing a bulletproof vest, could block the bullet with his own body and save the president . Hill could block a bullet from the president with his body, saving his life . Hill is not wearing the vest .
 Just a few more yards, and he could grab for the big handle on the trunk and yank himself up on the rear foothold . He could grab the handle of the trunk, yanking himself out of the car on the way .
 If he could do that he would be a human shield, the assassin would have to shoot through him to get the president . The president would be protected by a shield from an assassin's fire .
 The president's own Secret Service agent had not yet left the trail car . Only Jackie’s agent could save John Kennedy now . The president was killed by a single gunshot wound .
 Many soldiers in World War II and the Korean War had survived worse injuries . Many soldiers had suffered worse injuries during the war .
 If the driver gunned the engine and increased the car’s speed to 80 miles per hour, he could be in the emergency room of nearby Parkland Hospital in less than ten minutes .
 Newman family, two young parents and their two small children, were standing just a few feet away from the president . The Newman family was standing in front of the president at the time of the event .
 Bystander Mary Moorman raised her Polaroid camera and prepared to click the shutter . She raised her camera to capture the moment she took a Polaroid photo .
 After he heard the second shot, he did not take his eyes off the Depository . After hearing the second gun, he didn't take his eye off the depository . He said, "I don't know what happened to me"
 After the first two shots, the teenager was afraid he might get shot too . The teen was afraid of getting shot himself . He was shot twice in the head .
 Euins saw that the barrel was tracking JFK’s car as it moved farther away from the Depository . The barrel tracked JFK's car as he moved farther .
 The gunman thrust more of the rifle out of the window as the distance grew . The shooter thrusts the rifle more and more of it out of his window . The gunman is still at large .
 When Euins first saw the barrel, only the tip protruded from the window . The barrel is still visible in the view of the world's most famous photojournalist .
 Oswald was ready to fire for the third time, Euins says . By the time Oswald fired, three feet of rifle was visible . Oswald was killed by a single bullet bullet .
 Oswald had been taught to shoot at targets with fixed, iron sights without the aid of a telescopic sight . Oswald shot at targets at distances of two hundred, four hundred, and even six hundred yards . Oswald was a Marine Corps veteran .
 Oswald's third shot would determine if the president of the United States lived or died . The accuracy of Oswald’s third shot is the accuracy of the shot . Oswald's accuracy would determine the president's life or death .
 The third would determine whether he was remembered as a failure who missed his chance or as aman of history who changed the future .
 Photographer riding in the same press car as Tom Dillard glanced at the upper floors of the Depository . Bob Jackson, a photographer riding with Dillard, captured the image .
 Oswald’s gun was drawn in on the ledge of a window, witness says . Witness says he saw the rifle being drawn in . Witness: "I could see the rifle on a ledge"
 The president's assassin's rifle shot at the president, and possibly an image of Lee Harvey Oswald firing it . That would have been one of the most dramatic and important pictures in American history . The president was killed in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 Tom Dillard brought his camera up in an instant and snapped a photograph of the scene . Dillard: "It's been a great day for me. It's a great life," he said .
 All he got was a picture of the empty sixth-floor window and the Depository employees still in the windows one floor below .
 The third bullet hit John Kennedy in the back of the head and sliced through his thatch of thick, reddish brown hair . John Kennedy was shot in the head by a third bullet .
 It tore a neat hole through his scalp and punched a round hole through the back of his skull . It tore through the scalp and tore a hole in his skull, causing him to lose his life .
 The right rear side of the president’s skull blew out—exploded really—tearing open his scalp, and spewing skull fragments, blood, and brains several feet into the air . They hung for a few seconds, suspended in a pink cloud, where they hung for
 It splatters the motorcycle windshield and face of a police officer riding close to the left side of the car . It splattered the windshield of the motorcycle . The officer's face was splattered on the windshield .
 Clint Hill says the impact resembled the squashing sound of a melon being smashed on cement . Clint Hill: The impact resembled a squashing melon hitting on cement. Hill: "It's not the first time I've seen a person who has been hit by a car in a
 His wife’s mouth opened wide in shock as his limp body began to tip toward her . His limp body tipped toward her as his wife watched as he fell to his death .
 She was so Close to her husband when Oswald shot him in the head that her hair, face, white gloves, and pink suit were all stained with gore . Oswald's wife was so close to him she was covered in blood .
 Powers and O’Donnell watched it happen from just fifteen or twenty feet behind Kennedy’s car . Powers said it happened from just 15 or 20 feet behind the car . O'Donnell and Powers said they were there to watch the events .
 Red mist mist mist sprayed on the air from the air . The mist was a spray of red mist . The incident occurred in the early hours of the day .
 He lowered the stock from his right cheek, operated the bolt, ejected the third cartridge case, and chambered the fourth round . Then he lowered the . stock from the right cheek and operated the . bolt, ejecting the third . cartridge case and chambering the . fourth
 "He could not take as much time as he had between the second and third shots," he said . "I'm not going to be able to take as long as I was," he added .
 He would have to aim this shot by instinct, and maybe even use the iron sights and not the scope . He would need to aim by instinct .
 Locating the car in the telescopic sight might take a fraction of a second too long . Locating a car in a telescopic view may take a few seconds too long.
 Jackie and Clint Hill presented finer targets, and by now Oswald had a better chance of hitting them than the president . The president was shot in the head by Oswald in August 1944 .
 The disappearance of the shooter from the window did not convince Brennan that no more shots would be fired in Dealey Plaza . Brennan: "No more shots will be fired" Brennan says the shooting suspect was not behind bars . Brennan says no more gunfire would be heard from Dealey .
 Oswald was not a suicide mission for Oswald, despite his ritualistic behavior that morning at Ruth Paine’s house . This was not the first time Oswald had gone to Paine's house, but he was not suicidal .
 Oswald believed he was about to undertake a dangerous task from which he might never return . Leaving behind his wedding ring and almost all of his cash symbolized a shedding of worldly things . Oswald's fatalism suggests that Oswald believed that he was .
 This morning, although he had left his ring and cash, he left no note, letter, or political manifesto on the bedroom dresser . But this morning, he had also left a political manifesto .
 His survival instincts kicked in and whisked him away from the sixth floor window . "Survivor instinct kicked in," he says .
 He summoned all the will and the discipline buried inside him to shoot John F Kennedy . He had summoned the will . and discipline buried in him to kill Kennedy .
 President Obama is the first president to commit the act from long distance, with a rifle . He is also the first man to commit long-distance assassination from a long distance .
 Photograph taken moments after Oswald fired the third shot and disappeared from the sixth-floor window . Jackie Kennedy panicked .
 She saw that something had fallen onto the dark blue, mirrored finish of the limousine trunk . Something fell onto the trunk of the car .
 She rose from the backseat, turned around, kneeled on the blue upholstery, and reached for the top of the trunk . She then kneeled in front of the car, reaching for the trunk trunk .
 If Oswald had lingered in the window and desired to fire a fourth shot, he could have used his last bullet to kill Jackie . Oswald's last bullet could have been the last shot to kill her, author says .
 Still kneeling on the backseat, she stretched her body toward the skull fragment . The skull fragment is part of a skull found in the back seat of a car .
 The president, she might have convinced herself, would need that piece of his head when the doctors fixed him at the hospital, she said . The president's head is still in the hospital .
 If the car accelerated now, Jackie might be thrown onto the trunk, slide off it, fall to the pavement, and get run over by the Secret Service car . Jackie might have been thrown on the trunk of the car .
 He lunged forward and caught the left handle mounted on the back of the limousine . It was the first time the driver had caught the handle on the vehicle .
 Hill lost his footing as the car lurched forward, and Hill lost control of it . Hill was hit by a hail of hail of snow in the snowstorm . Hill says he was not hurt by the incident .
 Unless he released his grip, in another second the car would drag him down to the pavement . Unless he releases his grip he would be dragged to the ground .
 SS-100-X was traveling just a few yards behind the "Queen Mary" The “Queen Mary’s” would run him over and kill him . The ‘Queen Mary,” traveling just yards behind, would run the man over, killing him .
 He mustered all the strength he had and pulled hard against the handle, yanked his body up, and caught a tenuous foothold on the step . He pulled hard on the handle of the step and yanked up his body .
 He launched his body across the trunk of the trunk, gathered Jackie in his arms and pushed her back into the car . Then he launched himself across the car and pushed Jackie back into it . Jackie died in a car crash at the age of 16 .
 Other agents saw Hill pound his fist on the trunk and shake his head in despair . As the car sped away, other agents saw other agents see him pound his fists on the car .
 The president’s car accelerated and, along with the trailing Secret Service car, reached the shadows of the triple underpass and disappeared from the view of the witnesses in Dealey Plaza and the rest of the motorcade . The president's car was seen accelerating and disappearing from Dealey
 Abraham Zapruder was so shaken by what he had just seen, he lost the ability to speak coherently . Abraham was shaken by the moment he saw the Soviet Union invasion .
 Secret Service agent Rufus Youngblood yelled “Get down” in Vice President Johnson’s car . Youngblood climbed from the front seat into the back, pushed LBJ to the floor, and covered him with his body to protect him .
 Inside, Lyndon Johnson had no idea whether President Kennedy was dead or alive . Inside, LBJ was trying to find out if he was alive or dead .
 Parkland Hospital has been advised to stand by for a severe gunshot wound . The hospital has been alerted to a shooting at a local hospital .
 The president's car is now going past me. I repeat, a shooting in the motorcade . The president’s car was going past him. He says he heard a shooting .
 As he raced down the stairs, he possessed no evidence that would link him to the shooting . Now, as he ran, he had no evidence linking him to shooting victims .
 Oswald descended the floors—fifth, fourth, third, third floors—and encountered no one coming up . Oswald was on the Fifth, Fifth, Fourth, Fifth and Fifth floors of the Fifth Avenue Hotel .
 When he reached the second floor, he must have heard someone below him ascending the Stairs because he ducked into the lunchroom .
 A Dallas policeman, the first one to enter the Depository after the shooting, found the building manager, Roy Truly, and together, they hurried up the stairs . Truly was the building's building manager .
 Oswald spotted through a window in the lunchroom door, ordered him to stop, and asked the manager if Oswald worked there . When the policeman reached the second floor, he spotted Oswald through the window . Oswald worked in a lunchroom at the end of the day .
 When Truly answered yes, the policeman let Oswald go and continued racing to the roof . Truly answered 'yes' when he asked if Oswald was still alive .
 It was a spectacular error for the officer to assume that the assassin was not an employee at the Depository . The officer made a spectacular mistake, the officer said .
 REID hurried back to the front door of the Depository after the third shot . REID had hurried back after the shooting .
 She passed through the lobby, went up the stairs, and, within two minutes of the last shot, went into the hospital . She was shot in the head with a gun .
 That office had two doors: one in the back and one in back . That office has two doors, one in front of the back, another in the left .
 Within a minute or two, the police and Secret Service might seal off all the exits . Within a few minutes, all exits might be sealed off, police say .
 Reid walked several feet past her desk, a man entered the office through the back door . Reid was in the office at the time of the incident . Reid's office was attacked by a man who entered the building through a back door, Reid said .
 Oswald strode past her, walked out the front door of the office, and descended the stairs to the first-floor lobby . Oswald then strode into the lobby of the building .
 OSWALD could have escaped via the back door, the one through which he and Buell Wesley Frazier had come in to work that morning . Frazier and Oswald had come into the building with a rifle .
 A man with something to hide might have preferred to sneak out of the back way and run . The man was arrested in the early hours of the morning .
 Oswald shared Frazier’s philosophy: ‘If you run, people will just think you are guilty.’ But evidently Oswald shared his philosophy, running for president .
 Oswald decided to walk out right through the front door to avoid suspicion . Oswald walked out of the room to escape suspicion .
 Oswald thought the man was a Secret Service agent, but he only asked Oswald where he could find the nearest telephone . At that moment, a man grabbed Oswald and asked him to go to the nearest phone . Oswald thought that he could call the Secret Service .
 Seven months after his failed attempt to kill General Walker, his second attempt to shoot a man had proven more successful . Seven months later, General Walker was found dead .
 United Press International distributed reports to media outlets all over the world . Merriman Smith grabbed for the radiotelephone mounted near him in the front seat .
 Jack Bell from the rival Associated Press news service grabbed for the phone too . Another reporter from rival AP news service, Jack Bell, also grabbed the phone .
 The two newshounds struggled over their only link to the outside world . They were separated from each other for more than a decade .
 Each wanted the credit for transmitting the first news of the shooting to the world . Each wanted to be credited for their efforts to get the first word of the attack .
 He said they saw policemen and others, “running, scared, running—there are some tracks on the west side of the building, railroad tracks,” he said . He said he saw police officers and others ‘running’
 "We assumed maybe somebody was down there. But since everybody was running... to the west side of the building, towards the railroad tracks," she says . "Since everybody was ... running, we assumed maybe someone would be down there"
 If they had quickly run across the fifth floor and bounded up the staircase, they might have encountered Oswald on his way down . If they'd been quick, they could have encountered him on their way down, they would have been Oswald .
 Oswald had already descended below the fifth floor, they would have been close enough to him on the staircase to have heard him running down it . Even if he had already gone down, he would have heard the sound of the staircase .
 President Kennedy's arrival at Parkland Hospital would take him right past the Trade Mart . A thousand people awaited his arrival at the hospital .
 KBOX reporter Ron Jenkins, a reporter for Mobile Unit 6 at KBOX, was in position outside the Trade Mart .
 Jenkins watched the motorcade speed past him as the wail of multiple sirens almost drowned out his voice . Jenkins said he was stunned by the wails of sirens that drowned out him .
 Arnold Rowland and his wife already knew something was terribly wrong in Dealey Plaza . Arnold and wife Arnold knew something had to be done .
 If Lee Harvey Oswald had succeeded in assassinating General Walker seven months ago in April, perhaps his thirst for blood would have been sated . General Walker was assassinated in April by Lee Harvey O. Oswald .
 Marina Oswald had reported her husband's attempted murder to the police, perhaps on November 22 . Oswald's husband would have been languishing in jail instead of lurking in a sixth-floor window . If Marina Oswald reported that attempted murder, perhaps her husband would be in jail .
 If Lee Oswald had obtained permission to return to Russia or enter Cuba, perhaps he would not have been in Dallas this day . Lee Oswald would have been killed in Dallas, Texas, if he had been allowed to enter Cuba .
 If Marina had disposed of her husband's rifle when she had discovered it in Ruth Paine’s station wagon after her trip back from New Orleans to Texas, perhaps Lee would not have bought another one .
 Marina had agreed to move to a new apartment with Lee in Dallas with her family, Marina says . Lee was found dead at the scene of the murder of his wife and two daughters .
 If Marina had just moved the rifle from its hiding place in Ruth Paine’s garage, perhaps Lee would not have found it in time to bring it to work on Friday, November 22 .
 Rainproof plastic bubble top on limousine could have deflected bullets fired at the president's car . The weather forecast for Dallas was accurate, but weather forecast was not true .
 If John Kennedy had not been so stubborn about his habit of riding through cities in a convertible, perhaps Oswald would have never tried to kill him . Oswald was so stubborn that he would never try to kill John Kennedy again .
 If Kennedy’s agents, the “Ivy League Charlatans” had disobeyed their boss and stood on the back of the open car during the motorcade, perhaps Lee Harvey Oswald might never have had a clear shot at the head of JFK .
 Oswald fired a second shot at the White House in Washington, D.C., in September, killing President Kennedy . Oswald was killed by a single shot fired in the first World War II attack .
 If Arnold Rowland had told someone that there was a man with a rifle in the window, perhaps the assassination might have been prevented, perhaps, perhaps . Rowland was assassinated in 1968 .
 Agent William Greer swerved or accelerated the limousine after the second shot, perhaps the president would have survived his wound . Oswald would have missed the third shot, just as he had the first .
 CBS did not possess the technology to interrupt scheduled, pretaped programming and get a reporter's face on the air immediately . The technology was not available for the interruption .
 The television camera needed twenty minutes to warm up, and it was not even in the vicinity of the news desk . The camera was not in the area of the desk at the time of the incident .
 Marina Oswald, knowing that the president was in Dallas, had been watching television all morning . Marina Oswald knew she was going to Dallas when the president came to Dallas, Texas .
 The black-and-white images flickering on the screen were a poor substitute for the full-color, live, and in-person sights she would have enjoyed if Lee had granted her wish to see the president's motorcade .
 Ruth Paine left the television on for Marina when she left the house earlier in the morning to take her children to a doctor’s appointment .
 She told Marina, who could hardly speak English, that the announcer on TV had just said the president had been shot . Marina told Marina that she had been told the president was shot .
 Seconds after Cronkite announced the news, another printed bulletin was thrust into his hands . Seconds later, the news was delivered to the nation's president .
 President Kennedy shot today just as his motorcade left downtown Dallas . President Kennedy was shot in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 PT-109 and John Kennedy’s close brush with death during the Second World War . Everyone knew the story of the story .
 Millions of people began to hope and pray that Kennedy’s wounds were not fatal . Millions hoped and prayed for Kennedy's life after he was shot .
 Only a handful of people—Clint Hill and some of the Secret Service detail and Merriman Smith and a few other journalists—knew the truth .
 Smith was reluctant to report it without official confirmation from the White House staff . Smith: "I'm not sure if it's true, but I'm sure it's a good thing"
 Once the CBS network was able to broadcast both image and sound, Cronkite appeared on camera for the first time and continued to read news bulletins . Once the network had the ability to broadcast images and sound for the very first time Cronkites read bulletins for CBS .
 Within one hour of the shooting, more than three quarters of the American people knew what had happened . More than one in five people in the U.S. knew about the shooting .
 Oswald walked down Elm Street, the driver of President Kennedy’s car raced to Parkland Hospital, and police officers radioed ahead to advise the emergency-room staff to stand by to receive the victim of a severe gunshot wound . Oswald died of a gunshot wound in Dallas .
 In the minds of the five unwounded passengers, it seemed to go on forever . The five unwound passengers were taken to hospital with injuries . In the future, they will be reunited with their family .
 The two Secret Service agents in the front seat could do nothing to help the president other than get him to the hospital as fast as possible, reaching speeds of more than 80 mph .
 In the jump seats behind the agents, Nellie Connally tended to her stricken husband . The actor and his wife were sitting in jump seats .
 His wounds were painful, he was losing blood, and he lapsed in and out of consciousness . He lapsed into unconsciousness after suffering from his wounds .
 As Nellie held him in her arms, she promised him that everything would be all right . She promised him she would be alright .
 Behind the Connallys, the backseat was a tangle of intertwined arms and legs and bodies . The back seat was the back seat of a plane that crashed into Texas .
 After Clint Hill had saved Jackie from falling to the street and pushed her back inside the car, she grabbed the president and held him close .
 Hill sprawled on top of Jackie and the president to shield them from any further gunfire . Hill then lay down on Jackie to shield the president from further gunfire. Hill then collapsed to protect the president and Jackie from more gunfire .
 In his awkward, spread-eagled position over Kennedy and his wife, it was hard to hang on as the car reached top speed . It was hard for the driver to hang onto the car as it sped up .
 Under Hill’s human shield, the Kennedys rode to Parkland in contorted, sideways positions, lying partly on the backseat and partly on a floor . The Kennedyys rode in the back seat and the floor of the car . Hill was Hill's human
 Oswald's bullet had frozen on the president’s face, she said . She remembered the puzzled, astonished look Oswald had had frozen . Oswald had frozen the face of the president on Oswald's .
 The presidential limousine careened into the emergency-room driveway at Parkland Hospital . It was followed by the Secret Service trail car and the vice president’s vehicle .
 There were no medical carts awaiting the stricken president at the entrance of the White House .
 They lifted the broken body of Governor Connally from his seat, and his wife exited the vehicle . Connally's body was pulled from the vehicle by his wife and family members . The governor was pronounced dead at the scene .
 The president’s bodyguards wanted to snatch him from the backseat as quick as they could and rush him inside . The president's bodyguards rushed him inside the car .
 Once Clint Hill got out of the car, the other agents got a clear view of the backseat for the first time . The backseat of Clint Hill's car was also shown to the agents of the FBI .
 Agents bent over Kennedy to lift him out of the car, but Jackie would not let him go . Jackie refused to let Kennedy go, and he was taken to hospital .
 She wrapped her arms tight around him and cradled his head in her lap . She had wrapped his arms around him .
 Please, they told her, they needed to get the president inside so the doctors could treat him, she said . The president was rushed to the White House, where he was pronounced dead .
 Clint Hill, the agent she trusted most, beseeched her to release her husband . Clint Hill's wife was found dead at the scene of her husband's murder .
 The Secret Service had already assigned some of the president’s agents to Johnson . During the wild ride from Dealey Plaza, some of Johnson's agents were assigned to the president .
 In the car, Johnson’s agent Rufus Youngblood told him, “An emergency exists.” Johnson's agent said, ‘An emergency existed.’ Johnson was in the car at the time .
 As soon as the vice president’s car arrived at the hospital, Youngblood and other agents hustled him inside . The vice president was rushed to the hospital .
 JFK was still in his limousine, and the agents did not allow Johnson to approach the president’s car . The president was in the limo at the time .
 Lady Bird glimpsed a splash of color -- a pink suit -- as she was rushed into Parkland .
 Youngblood asked a hospital staffer to lead the Johnson party to a quiet, out-of-the-way room .
 When they got there, LBJ leaned against a wall and gazed into Lady Bird’s eyes . Lady Bird was the first lady to meet LBJ .
 When reporters arrived at Parkland, the president had still not been removed from the limousine . The president was still not removed from his limo .
 Merriman Smith was the first journalist to see the wounded John Kennedy . He was first to see him in hospital .
 "We were standing literally a couple feet from the car, starring down at Kennedy. We were looking at Kennedy," he said .
 He was lying with the side of his head exposed and his head in Jackie’s lap . The side of the head was exposed and the side was exposed .
 I was not conscious of any wound to the head, so that part of his head was hidden, probably deliberately by Jackie. Jackie. 'Jackie was probably deliberately trying to hide his head,' he said .
 CLINT HILL's intuition and close relationship with Jackie told him why she was covering her husband’s head with her arms and her body .
 No one standing there would see the president’s horrible wound or his eyes fixed wide open in a Stare . Now no one standing . would see . The president's horrible wound .
 Jackie released her hold, and Secret Service men lifted John Kennedy’s unconscious body from the backseat of her car . John Kennedy's unconscious body was pulled from the car .
 KBOX reporter Ron Jenkins chased the president’s limousine from the Trade Mart to Parkland, Florida .
 By the time his mobile unit got there, police officers had blocked the entry . Police officers blocked the entrance to the building .
 We do not and cannot confirm the reports that the president has been shot, CNN.com has confirmed .
 Witness says he saw the president slump in his seat . Witness says that he definitely was shot . Witness: "I saw him slump in my seat. He was shot twice"
 The journalist had managed to slip inside the building before police sealed it off . Police sealed the building after the journalist slipped inside .
 Oswald was on the run when he was captured . Oswald had no escape plan, but he had a few days to spare . Oswald was killed in September 1945 .
 If he had owned a car, he could have driven himself out of the city and as far away from Dallas as he could get, possibly fleeing the country to Mexico .
 Booth had a fast horse standing behind Ford’s Theatre, a planned escape route, and the names and locations of sympathizers who might help him during his escape south from Washington . Booth's escape route was planned after Lincoln's assassination . Booth had fast horse behind Ford's Theatre,
 He walked seven blocks on Elm Street, then flagged down a passing city bus that was headed in the direction he wanted to go . He flagged down the bus at 12:40 P.M. on Thursday .
 Oswald was not standing at a scheduled bus stop, the driver opened the door and let him board anyway . Oswald was allowed to board the bus despite not being at a stop . Oswald had not been seen at a bus stop at the time .
 Heavy traffic slows traffic to almost a standstill near the Depository . The bus was headed to the Texas State House from Dallas, Texas .
 The night he tried to murder General Walker, it was dark, and traffic was light . The night of the attempted murder attempt was dark and traffic light, but it was also light .
 The man who had just shot the president of the United States was stuck in traffic, trying to flee on a public bus . The man was shot in the head as he tried to flee the scene .
 Oswald stood up, walked to the front of the bus, took a transfer, and asked the driver to let him off . Oswald realized the ridiculousness of his position, and walked off the bus to take a transfer instead .
 At about 12:47 pm. , he caught a taxi to his rooming house . Within a few minutes, at about 1:30 pm. He caught a cab to the hotel . Within minutes, he was gone .
 Oswald did not want the driver to know where he lived, so he did not give him his numbered address . Oswald had the taxi drop him a few blocks away from his rooming house . Oswald didn't want to give the driver his address so he had to drop him off .
 When he arrived, the proprietor of the rooming house was watching news of the assassination on television . He arrived at the scene of the shooting, he said .
 He hurried to his room, changed jackets, picked up his revolver and some ammunition . He then headed to his hotel room, where he picked up a revolver and ammunition .
 After a couple of minutes, he left at 1:03 pm without saying a word . Then he left without saying anything .
 Perhaps he hoped to get to the bus station and buy a ticket to Mexico . Perhaps he still had enough money on him for that, although not for much more .
 Trade Mart rumor spread from table to table that President Kennedy had been shot . Rumors spread among table-to-table that Kennedy was shot .
 Secret Service agents and hospital staffers rushed the president into trauma room one . The president was rushed to the hospital in a "trauma room one" incident .
 Assistant White House press secretary Malcolm Kilduff watched as Jackie Kennedy helped push the stretcher through the halls .
 They lifted the president from the cart and laid him on his back upon the examination table . The president was placed on the exam table for the first time in his life .
 From throughout Parkland Hospital, doctors rushed to the emergency room . Doctors rushed to Parkland hospital to treat patients .
 Others were unneeded voyeurs who wanted only to lay eyes upon the president so that one day they could say that they had been there . Others wanted to see the president in person so that they could remember him in person .
 Without official confirmation, Smith did not want to report what Clint Hill had told him . Hill told Smith that the president was already dead, Smith said .
 Unknown sniper fires three shots at President Kennedy in Dallas . Unknown sniper has fired three shots in Dallas, Texas . President Kennedy was shot by a sniper .
 Doctors and Secret Service agents worked on the president's car . The president was rushed to a hospital in New York City . He was taken to a critical condition .
 Agents mounted a hardtop to prevent curiosity seekers from peering into the backseat . The hardtop is a hard top, not the clear plastic bubble top .
 The family cleaned the backseat and the floor of the car . Then they got steel buckets filled with water and towels and began to wash the back and floor .
 A young man, I assume he was a Secret Service man, with a sponge and a bucket of red water . He was trying to wipe up the blood and what looked like flakes of flesh and brains in the back seat . The driver was killed in a car crash .
 The president’s limousine at Parkland Hospital was in the front seat with red roses .
 Secret Service agents attached a hardtop to wash away the president’s blood . The president's blood was soothed by the hardtop . The hardtop was attached to the President's blood .
 Everything in it, including possible bullet fragments, should have been left as is and preserved for the investigation that was sure to follow the assassination . Everything in the case should be preserved for investigation, including bullet fragments .
 It was as though they believed, through some faulty logic, that if they could just wipe away the evidence of the crime, they could turn back the clock and pretend it had never happened . They believed, though though, that . if they . just wiped away the . evidence, they
 Jackie walked into the room where desperate surgeons worked to save her husband’s life . Jackie was in the room at the time of her husband's death .
 The appearance of the president’s wife, a haunting pale figure in the bright pink suit, shocked the doctors . The president's wife is a haunting figure in a pale pink suit .
 Blood streaked her face, saturated her white gloves, and stained her suit and stockings . Blood stained her stockings and her face .
 She nudged one of the doctors, and without speaking she held out her cupped hands . Without speaking, she held her hands up to the doctor . She said, "I'm going to be in the hospital. I'm not going to die."
 If John Kennedy had been any other patient, the doctors would have already pronounced him dead, perhaps even dead on arrival at Parkland Hospital . Kennedy was not the first person to be pronounced dead at the scene of the shooting .
 "They had to try everything. But this was the president of the United States," she said . "They must try everything," she added .
 Surgeons massage the president’s heart, hoping to stimulate a rhythmic beat . As a last resort, one of the surgeons massage the heart .
 John Kennedy's suit coat, pants, shirt, tie, and other garments . They contained John Kennedy’s suit coat and pants, shirts, ties, and ties .
 As the room emptied, Jackie Kennedy approached the table on which her husband lay dead . Jackie Kennedy: "It's not easy to say goodbye to your husband, but it's a very difficult thing to do"
 Then she removed her wedding ring and slipped it onto one of his fingers . Then she slipped it on one of the fingers .
 Assistant White House press secretary Malcolm Kilduff needed to find Vice President Lyndon Johnson to tell him that John Kennedy was dead . Vice President Johnson needed to be told that Kennedy had been killed .
 Kilduff went to the holding room where the Secret Service had hidden Johnson from view . The Secret Service hid him from view in a holding room .
 LBJ’s bodyguards had kept him far from trauma room one, so he had no personal knowledge of the president's condition . LBJ's bodyguards kept him out of trauma room room one .
 LBJ told him it would be better to wait until after he had left the hospital for Love Field and returned to the safety of Air Force One . LBJ: "It would be best to wait for him to leave the hospital"
 Agent Rufus Youngblood decided he should escort the new president to the plane with as little fanfare as possible . Agent Youngblood escorted the president to his first plane with a low-key escort .
 There would be no entourage, no big motorcade accompanied by police cars and motorcycles with their screaming, attention-getting sirens . Instead, police cars, motorcycles with screaming sirens would not be accompanied by an entourage .
 Youngblood dared not put Johnson in SS-100-X, the presidential limousine . The president was in the limo at the time of the assassination .
 Johnson got into an unmarked car that gave no outward clue to the identity of his precious passenger . Johnson was taken to the hospital in an apparent suicide attempt .
 At Parkland Hospital, at 1.33 pm. , Mac Kilduff walked into a room to make a statement to the journalists who awaited him there . At 1:33 pm., Mac Kildeuff made his statement to reporters at the hospital .
 There are strong indications that he may have already expired, although that is not official . There are also strong indications he may already have already died .
 The sound of papers rustling in his hand -- the latest bulletins from United Press -- went over the air . The sound was the sound of the latest United Press bulletins . The United Pressman was in the air when the news broke .
 At 1.38 PM. Walter Cronkite appeared on CBS television and made this announcement . A visibly shaken Cronkites made the announcement at 1:38 .
 Just a few weeks ago he had enjoyed the privilege of conducting a one-on-one, sit-down television interview with President Kennedy .
 People at home that afternoon sat in their living rooms, riveted by television and radio alerts .
 Others gathered in quiet groups around office televisions sets and radios . Others gathered around office TVs, radios and televisions .
 Millions of people working that day were out to lunch when Kennedy was shot . They heard the news when restaurants tuned their TVs and radios to news broadcasts .
 On the streets, many people gathered in front of appliance stores and watched the silent televisions on display behind plate glass windows .
 Drivers stopped in traffic and got out of their cars to talk to other drivers . Drivers stopped and talked to each other during traffic stops .
 When newspapers started publishing special editions that afternoon, frantic customers snapped up copies as soon as they were delivered to newsstands, drugstores and other outlets .
 David Lipscomb High School in Nashville, Tennessee, received the news of the assassination . The school's reaction to the news was representative of how it arrived at schools across the nation .
 Tommy Ingram, editor in chief of the school newspaper, the Pony Express, reacted fast to the breaking news . The Pony Express is a junior high school newspaper .
 Lola Sue Scobey, secretary of the student body said, “We don’t realize how historical this day is.” The student body secretary said .
 Principal Damon Daniel summoned his stunned students to an assembly program . Students were stunned to learn of the tragedy .
 Ingram had one of his staffers take photographs in the halls and at the assembly . Those reaction shots captured weeping teachers and dazed students .
 National Scholastic Press Association honored the Pony Express by giving the paper its coveted All-American rating and naming it a Medalist, the association’s highest award . Later, the paper was honored by the association by giving it the coveted All American rating .
 Seigenthaler was a friend of John and Robert Kennedy . Tommy did not know it, but he was friends with the Kennedy family .
 Hospital staffers wrapped his head in towels and sheets of plastic so his blood would not stain the silk lining of the coffin . While it was on its way, hospital staffers washed the president’s body and wrapped it in towels .
 When the coffin arrived, funeral-home workers wheeled it into the emergency room . The coffin arrived at the funeral home, and it was wheeled into the hospital .
 Robert Kennedy insisted on setting up the line so that J Edgar Hoover could not avoid taking his calls . Robert Kennedy had insisted that J. Edgar Hoover would not be able to avoid taking calls .
 Hoover had great antipathy for all the Kennedys, but he disliked Bobby most of all . Hoover disliked Bobby Kennedy most, but disliked him most, according to Hoover .
 Hoover judged the Kennedys to be hypocrites and moral failures . Hoover knew all about the president’s indiscretions with women, going back to World War II affair with a probable Nazi spy .
 The director bristled at the presence of the special phone on his desk . The director, a veteran of decades of Washington intrigue and turf battles, bristles at the phone .
 Hoover had to submit to what he believed was a humiliation . But the attorney general was his superior in rank, and Hoover believed it was humiliating .
 Robert Kennedy was in McLean, Virginia, having lunch at his expansive home, Hickory Hill . It's less than a half-hour drive from the Department of Justice at Ninth and Pennsylvania Avenues .
 Bobby, his wife Ethel, and two Justice Department lawyers, U.S. Attorney Robert Morgenthau and his assistant, were sitting by the pool and eating sandwiches . Bobby, Ethel and two lawyers, two Justice Dept. lawyers, and United States Attorney Robert . Morgenth
 Press liaison Richard Riedel walked onto the floor of the Senate and said, “The president has been shot.” President Obama was shot .
 JFK’s brother, Senator Edward “Ted” Kennedy, happened to be presiding over the chamber . JFK's brother, Ted, was presiding in the chamber of commerce .
 Whenever the president of the Senate was absent, senators took turns wielding the authority of the gavel . Vice President Lyndon Johnson was absent from the Senate .
 Bobby did not know that Bobby had already heard what he was about to tell him . Bobby had been told what he would do next by Bobby .
 The corpse could not be removed until after an autopsy was performed in Texas . Earl Rose, Dallas County medical examiner, told agent Roy Kellerman that the corpse cannot be removed .
 I am Special Agent in Charge of the White House Detail of the Secret Service . The Secret Service is responsible for protecting President Barack Obama .
 Admiral George Burkley, the president’s physician, joined the argument, telling Rose that they could not keep Mrs. Rose . Admiral Burkley told Rose that she was not allowed to leave .
 A justice of the peace, who had the authority to overrule Rose, showed up . Rose was charged with trespassing on the grounds of Rose's home .
 At 2:08 pm. , the agents began to roll the coffin through the emergency room to the white hearse waiting outside . The coffin was rolled through the ER and into the hearse at 2:07 pm.
 As much as JFK’s Irish mafia, the agents on his detail had grown to love him . The agents on JFK's security had grown up to love JFK .
 They marched right past State officials, out the door, and to the hearse . They marched past the State officials and out of the door .
 John Kennedy loyalists had no way of knowing that they had made a serious mistake . John Kennedy’s loyalists were not aware of their mistake .
 The obstructions and the resulting failure to conduct an autopsy in Dallas within a few hours of the murder would come to haunt the history of John Kennedy’s assassination for the next fifty years . Their obstructions led to the failure of an autopsy within hours after the murder .
 The intense display of emotions by Kennedy’s grieving staff and Secret Service detail at Parkland Hospital served the nation poorly . It would create widespread suspicion and mistrust about the facts of the assassination and encourage wild theories .
 Dallas police officer spotted Oswald walking on the sidewalk . Oswald was a Dallas resident of a Dallas suburb . Oswald had been in the neighborhood for more than a decade before the assassination .
 Oswald matched it in a general way, so Tippit decided to pull over to the curb and have a word with him . Oswald matched the way he did it in the general way . Oswald was the driver of the day .
 Oswald called out to Oswald through the open passenger-side window of the car . Oswald was shot dead by a police officer . Oswald had been in the car at the time of the shooting .
 In a casual way, he leaned on the top edge of the passenger door, looked inside, and conversed with Tippit . "I don't think it's the first time I've seen him," he said .
 Witnesses who saw the encounter were too far away to overhear the exchange . Witnesses said the encounter was between a man and woman .
 Tippit swung open his car door and got out of the car . Whatever Oswald said, it must not have satisfied Tipperit, he got out .
 When he stood up in the street, he did not reach for his holster and place his hand on the butt of his revolver . He did not place his gun on his hand, but instead reached for the gun .
 Tippit started to walk around the front hood of his car, toward the curb where Oswald waited for him . Oswald was waiting for him at the curb .
 Oswald pulled his revolver from his jacket pocket, aimed it at the policeman’s chest, and opened fire . A moment later, at 1:15 pm. , Oswald pulled the revolver out of his pocket . Oswald opened fire on the policeman, killing him and wounding him .
 He had taken Tippit by surprise and shot him three times before the policeman could even draw his own pistol . The policeman was taken aback by the surprise of the shooting .
 Oswald pointed his pistol at the helpless officer, took aim, shot him in the head, and killed him . Oswald then pointed the gun at the officer, taking aim, and shot him dead .
 Oswald had already committed a horrible crime—he had murdered the president of the United States . Yes, Oswald had committed a terrible crime, but it was already a crime, he had committed it .
 The rifle was an impersonal, antiseptic weapon that allowed Lee to remain detached from the ugly reality of his crime . Lee's rifle was the weapon he used to carry out his murder .
 He did not have to look into the backseat of the car at the blood and brains of the victim . The victim was killed in a car crash in 2010 .
 President Obama's third shot freezes on the president’s face . He did not see the surprised, eyes-wide-open stare his third shot had frozen on him . And he didn’t see the surprise stare he had frozen in the face .
 Lee Harvey Oswald committed murder of another kind -- up close and personal . Oswald committed his first murder an hour later, but now, he's committed murder again .
 He bent down and chatted with the officer; he was close enough to the policeman to smell him . When he leaned on the top edge of the passenger side door, he had bent down to the officer . The officer was on duty at the time of the incident .
 Oswald had shot Tippit at close range when he stepped out of the car . Oswald shot him in the head at close-range . Oswald was killed in the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln .
 As Tippit lay dying on a city street, his lungs emitted a gurgling sound . As he lay dying in the street, Tippits' lungs emitted an exhalation of breath .
 He no longer had the strength to grasp his revolver, raise his arm, and shoot his assailant . He was no longer able to grasp the strength of his revolver .
 Oswald raised his arm and pointed the barrel of his revolver at Tippit’s head . Oswald then pointed the gun at the head of the man . Oswald raised the gun and pointed it at the man's head .
 He walked away, swung open the cylinder of his revolver, pulled out the four empty cartridges, and tossed them on the ground . He then walked away and walked away .
 One man heard him mutter ‘poor dumb cop’ or “poor damn cop” as he fled the scene .
 Some of them followed him, and then, from a safe distance, began chasing him . Some of the people followed him and then began chasing .
 Without knowing they were in pursuit of the president’s killer, a small posse chased Lee Harvey Oswald through the streets of Dallas . The posse was chasing Oswald less than one hour after the assassination .
 Oswald loaded four fresh bullets into his pistol as he ran, pushing the cylinder into firing position . Oswald loaded the bullets into the pistol and pushed the cylinder in firing position. Oswald then loaded four more bullets in his pistol .
 Oswald's murder was the only logical reason for Oswald to murder a police officer was to avoid immediate arrest . Oswald was killed by Oswald in August, but was not arrested immediately . Oswald committed the murder to avoid arrest, police say .
 As soon as they reported the shooting, the whole neighborhood would be crawling within minutes with police officers and detectives hunting for him . The neighborhood was crawling with police and detectives, police said .
 If Oswald had not killed Tippit, he would have had more time to carry out his escape . Oswald's escape would have been more successful if he had not been killed . Oswald was killed by Oswald's wife, who was shot in the head by Oswald .
 He had not yet been identified by name as a suspect in the assassination of the president . He was not yet named by name by police .
 Oswald's boardinghouse would have sent men to his boardinghouse; they would discover that he had already been there and gone . Oswald would have already been at the boardinghouse and gone, the author says . Oswald’s absence would have been discovered by the authorities, he says .
 The Marine Corps veteran defected to the Soviet Union and returned to the U.S. He had a history of interest in Russia, Cuba, and Communism .
 Buell Frazier would tell them about the curtain rods that morning, and he could lead them to Ruth Paine’s house and to Marina, Marina . Frazier would then tell them how Oswald's Russian-born wife, Marina, was born in the U.S.
 Once they find the rifle, they could begin tracing its serial number to the place that sold it and to the name of the person who bought it . Also, they can begin tracing the place where it was sold and who bought the rifle .
 CNN.com will feature iReporter photos in a weekly Travel Snapshots gallery . Please submit your best shots at CNN iReport.com photos of the latest travel destinations in the gallery .
 Oswald was lucky not to be named as a suspect or show his picture on TV until late that afternoon or the evening . Oswald's picture could be shown late that evening or late that day .
 The newspapers might not even print his name and photograph until the next morning . His name and photo may not even be printed until the morning .
 Not until he killed a policeman did he become the object of a furious manhunt . He was found dead at the hands of a police officer in the early hours of the day .
 L.YNDON JOHNSON waited aboard Air Force One for the hearse carrying Kennedy’s body to arrive at the airport .
 Some of Johnson’s political advisers were urging him to fly back to Washington right away and leave Mrs. Johnson behind .
 Kennedy left behind to catch Air Force Two, the vice presidential jet, later in the day . Kennedy was traveling with President Barack Obama .
 "Nothing was more important than protecting the life of the new president," says President Vladimir Putin . "Nothing is more important now than protecting his life," says Putin .
 The best way to do that was to get Lyndon Johnson back to the capital as soon as possible, he says . Johnson was assassinated in 1968 .
 If LBJ was the next target, LBJ needed to get out of Dallas, Texas . If this was a conspiracy, he needed to leave Dallas . LBJ: "If this was the case, it's not a conspiracy"
 President Obama decided they would not fly back to Washington immediately and abandon Mrs. Michelle Obama . He decided not to abandon his wife, who he said she was going to be with him .
 She refused to leave without her husband’s corpse and because Johnson refused to depart without her, he ordered Air Force One to wait . Air Force 1 was ordered to wait for her .
 Johnson also decided that he would take the oath of office on the ground in Dallas before the plane took off . Johnson will be sworn in as president in Dallas .
 Jackie refused to be separated from her husband, so she sat in back, next to the casket . She refused to sit in front of her husband's casket and sat next to him in the back .
 The modest motorcade from the hospital to the airport was not as grand as the one that had left Love Field for downtown Dallas just two hours ago .
 They had broken off the bouquet during the mayhem in the presidential limousine . The bouquet was broken off during the chaos .
 Secret Service agents and members of President Kennedy’s staff carry his casket aboard Air Force One . President Kennedy's casket was carried aboard the plane .
 At the airport, Kennedy’s aides and Secret Service agents carried the heavy burden up the stairs of an airline ramp and onto the plane .
 They could barely lift it—it weighed eight hundred pounds, not counting the added weight of the president’s body . The president's body was added weight by the weight of his body .
 To make the coffin narrower, they had to break the carrying handles off its sides so they could push it onto the plane . The coffin had to be made narrower to make it fit inside the coffin .
 They secured it in a small cabin near the back, where some seats had been removed to accommodate it . Some seats had already been removed from the plane .
 The coffin was now on board Air Force One when the coffin was on board, but it was not until he took the oath of office and was sworn in as the president of the United States .
 Johnson, a Texan, had summoned an old friend, a local federal district court judge named Sarah T Hughes, to rush to Love Field to swear him in .
 The swearing in was a formality to confirm what had already happened . This was all a great bit of historical drama, because of the historical nature of the swearing-in .
 Johnson did not need to take the oath in order to assume the presidency . By authority of the United States Constitution he had already become president upon the death of his predecessor .
 Lyndon Johnson wanted to take the oath at once as a symbol of the continuity of the U.S. government . But he also wanted to be seen as symbol of continuity of American government .
 He wanted the ceremony photographed to transmit that symbol around the world . And he wanted to use it as a symbol of peace .
 A White House photographer, Captain Cecil Stoughton, was aboard the plane . The plane landed in Washington, DC, at the end of the flight .
 He loaded two cameras with film and planned in his head where he and the new president should stand in the cramped cabin to create the most solemn and impressive photograph . He then planned to create a photo of himself and the president standing together .
 The image would convey that Johnson was now in charge of the government . The image was intended to show that Johnson had now taken control of the country .
 By tradition, when a president took the oath of office, he stood alone, raised his right hand, and repeated the words of the oath . The oath was recited by the chief justice of the Supreme Court of the United States .
 President Kennedy’s request was a bold and, in the opinion of some of his staffers, an outrageous and offensive request . The request was made by President Kennedy, who was assassinated in 1968 .
 Johnson realized his request demanded sensitivity, delicacy, and tact . Johnson realized that his request needed sensitivity and delicacy .
 Before he became vice president, when he was a United States senator and held the powerful post of majority leader, he was renowned for his legendary skill at persuading other people to do what he asked .
 It was one thing to strong-arm a fellow politician in a backroom deal over a piece of legislation in Congress . But it was quite another to handle the bereaved and beloved First Lady of the United States .
 Lyndon and Lady Bird Johnson went to Jacqueline Kennedy’s private compartment to offer their condolences . The two men offered their condolences to the late president .
 Johnson explained that he summoned a federal judge to administer the presidential oath aboard Air Force One before the plane flew back to Washington . Johnson said he summoned the judge to give the oath aboard the plane .
 Johnson left her alone to compose herself until Judge Hughes arrived . Believing she had agreed, Johnson left the woman alone .
 Her suit, white gloves, and stockings were caked with dried blood . The bright red, wet blood spilled two hours ago had, after exposure to oxygen, solidified and taken on a darker color .
 To prepare for the swearing-in ceremony, she retired to her small bathroom . She retired to a small bathroom to prepare .
 Johnson spotted two of Kennedy’s aides and said, “Do you want to ask Mrs. Kennedy?” Johnson said .
 She emerged from her room and entered the cabin where Lyndon Johnson, Judge Hughes, the photographer, and a number of the passengers awaited her .
 Merriman Smith was on the plane as a pool reporter and watched the scene unfold . He was on board with the president when the plane landed .
 Cecil Stoughton had started taking pictures of the scene even before Jackie walked in . Cecil took pictures of Jackie walking in at the end of the night . Cecil started to take pictures even before she arrived .
 Kennedy walked down the narrow corridor from her bed chamber and into the lounge . Kennedy was in the lounge at the time of her death .
 Her appearance startled everyone—they had assumed she would change into a fresh outfit . Her appearance surprised everyone . They assumed she had changed into a new outfit . They were shocked to find out what had happened .
 Stoughton raised one of his cameras as Judge Hughes read the oath and Johnson repeated it . The photographer took several shots before switching to his second camera .
 The only other sounds in the cabin were the clicking shutters of the cameras . Only other sounds were the click of the shutters .
 Lyndon Johnson was sworn in aboard Air Force One before it departs Dallas . Ra Cpuses Hy eter ay. be an oe a al Rag .
 Jackie’s appearance horrified Stoughton, who aimed his lens out the lower part of her body to hide the bloody skirt and stockings .
 At 2:38 p.M. Johnson raised his right hand and was sworn in as the thirty-sixth president of the United States .
 Lyndon Johnson had already been president for almost two hours, but when the oath was done, his presidency officially began . Lyndon Johnson was already in office when he was sworn in .
 Stoughton had taken what remains, to this day, perhaps the most iconic, riveting, and harrowing photographs in American history .
 Jackie returned to the back of the plane, to the casket, where she found Ken O'Donnell, Larry O’Brien, and Dave Powers . After the swearing in, Jackie went back to the plane .
 Before Air Force One left Dallas, Stoughton hurried off the plane with cameras and film .
 It was his job to develop the pictures so they could be published in the evening newspapers throughout the country .
 Air Force One hurtled down the runway and took flight for Washington . Within a few minutes, the plane took off for the first time .
 Oswald had lost the people who had followed him from the Tippit murder scene . Oswald made it to a commercial district on West Jefferson Boulevard, he had lost them .
 When he heard a police siren, he turned his back to the street and pretended to study a display of footwear behind the plate-glass windows of a shoe store . He pretended to be studying the display behind the glass windows of the store when he heard the siren .
 If anyone had followed him there, one telephone call would summon a dozen police cars to the scene . "One phone call would be enough to summon police cars," police say .
 Police departments were, and still are, relentless in pursuing a criminal who has shot one of their own . Police departments are relentless in pursuit of those who have shot one another .
 Oswald's failure to buy a movie ticket might provoke theater employees to call the police to report a nonpaying customer . Even if Oswald had evaded his pursuers, his failure to pay might provoke the police .
 Oswald could find himself trapped inside a building with no escape . Either way, Oswald could be trapped in a building without an escape .
 When he saw Oswald duck inside, he persuaded employees there to call the police . He persuaded employees at the scene to report Oswald to police .
 He sat in the darkness of a theater watching a matinee showing of a movie about World War II titled War Is Hell . Now he sits in the dark, watching a film about the war called "War Is Hell"
 Detectives climbed onto the stage of a movie theater in New York City . Detectives ran inside toward the screen and climbed on to the stage . The theater was on Broadway at the time .
 One of them grabbed his arm and tried to twist the revolver out of his hand . One of the men tried to pull the gun from his hand, but he was hit by it .
 Oswald was arrested at 1:50 pm. , one hour and twenty minutes after the president had been shot, Oswald was in custody . Oswald was taken into custody at 1.50pm. Oswald was the only person to be arrested at that time .
 They were not sure they had caught Kennedy’s killer . But they were convinced they had just apprehended the cold-blooded murderer of Officer Tippit .
 Oswald kept refusing to identify himself, so a policeman pulled his wallet out of his pocket and searched it for identification . Oswald was found with a wallet in his pocket when he was shot dead . Oswald's wallet was searched by a police officer .
 Police advised suspect that he might want to turn his face away from journalists and TV cameras waiting for him . When the car arrived at the City Hall garage, the police advised their suspect to look away .
 Oswald was about to face the first of several police interrogations . Oswald was being questioned by police for the first time in his life .
 He would be pitted against a savvy homicide detective, Will Fritz, a veteran master of extracting confessions . Fritz is a department legend and master master of extract confessions . He is a veteran detective and veteran detective .
 He would become the suspect’s principal interrogator in what would become a multiday game of catand-mouse with the chatty assassin . The suspect would be interrogated by the assassin .
 Fritz’s intuition told him this was the man who had murdered the president, Fritz said . Fritz's intuition told Fritz that Oswald was the killer of the president .
 In the hours ahead, Dallas police, FBI, and Secret Service would not be the only ones allowed to question him . Dallas police and FBI would be among those allowed to speak to him .
 Others who could help spoil the legal case against Oswald would soon have access to him too . Others who had no business doing so would soon be able to get access to Oswald . Oswald's trial is expected to last for a year .
 Oswald was arrested at 2:00 p.M. by police officers at the Texas Theatre . Oswald was taken to police headquarters by the time of 2:30 p.m. Oswald had been arrested at the theater .
 Oswald recognized Oswald at once in interrogation room . When detectives took him into an interrogation room, a man there recognized Oswald . Oswald was the only person in the room to recognize Oswald .
 In his wallet, one piece of identification said his name was Hidell, and another said it was Oswald . Oswald's name is Hidell; Hidell was Oswald, Oswald was Oswald's .
 Oswald was moved to the office of Captain Fritz at 2:20 p.m. on Friday, November 22 . Oswald's office was located in Captain Fritz's office . Oswald was a member of the World War II resistance movement .
 The Dallas district attorney, Henry Wade, had jurisdiction over the Tippit case, as he did over all murders in Dallas . Wade was in charge of the case, and had jurisdiction of all murders .
 Oswald was also a suspect in the murder of President Kennedy . Wade and the Dallas police retained control of Oswald even when it became obvious that Oswald was a suspect .
 No federal statute made killing a president a federal crime, so the U.S. attorney and the FBI had no power to seize Oswald . Oswald was taken from the custody of the Dallas Police Department .
 Captain Fritz entered the office and by 2:30 p.M., the first interrogation of Oswald had begun . Oswald's interrogation was the first of his interrogations to begin .
 Oswald told Oswald that a lady he knew recommended him for the job, and that he got it through her . Oswald told him that she recommended him to the job . Oswald said he got the job through her, and she recommended it to him .
 Oswald wanted to warm Oswald up with a series of routine questions to get him talking . Oswald says he's not interested in politics, but he wants to know more about his legacy .
 Oswald said he lived on Beckley in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas, Dallas . Oswald said no, Oswald said, he lived in the Dallas suburb of Oak Cliff .
 James Hosty was the agent who had called on Marina Oswald a few times after she and Lee had moved to Texas . Hosty had been a regular contact with Marina Oswald and Lee Oswald, a former FBI agent. Hosty says he called Marina Oswald several times in the weeks leading up
 Oswald infuriated Oswald when the FBI barged in and infuriated him . Oswald was having a calm chat with his prisoner and getting to know him, the detective says .
 He might spring from out of his chair, tackle one of the detectives or special agents, and grab for a gun . Free of the cuffs, he might spring out of the chair, tackling a detective or special agent .
 Fritz settled on a compromise, telling his men to remove the cuffs and recuff Oswald’s hands in front of his body . Oswald's hands were removed from his body, but his hands were recuffed .
 Oswald appeared to have calmed down, Fritz hit him with his first serious question . Fritz hit Oswald with a question: "What do you think of Oswald? What do you know of Oswald?"
 Hosty interrupted Fritz’s line of questioning and asked Oswald if he had ever been to Mexico . Oswald had been in Mexico at the time of the assassination . Hosty then interrupted Fritz's questioning and said Oswald had never been there .
 Oswald did not want the FBI agent to take the interrogation off track or anger Oswald . Oswald was not angry at the agent, but he did not think Oswald would anger him . Oswald died in November 1945 .
 He asked Lee if he had a Russian wife, if he'd ever been to Russia, and for how long . Lee says he's never been in Russia, but he's been there for a long time .
 Fritz: "It was obvious that allowing the FBI agent to question the suspect was counterproductive" Fritz: Letting the suspect question was counterproductive . Fritz: It was obvious to Fritz that allowing an FBI agent questioned the suspect is counterproductive .
 Hosty provoked Oswald during his time with the police detective . Hosty was known to provoke Oswald, but he was never provoked . Oswald was shot dead in August 1945 .
 Ruth and Marina Paine watched television coverage of the assassination . The Paine family watched the assassination at the Paine house .
 Police were following up Depository employment records . They followed up employment records and drove to Ruth's house .
 When they arrived, the screen door was closed but the front one was open . The screen door had been closed, but the door was open when they arrived .
 One of the policemen reached down to pick up the blanket and its contents . The blanket and contents were left behind by the police officer .
 Top aides to John Kennedy took turns to visit her at the back of the plane . They reminisced and told stories of happier days .
 Dave Powers told stories about the president’s trip to Ireland that June . Dave Powers tells stories of the president's trip .
 Jackie was surrounded by the men who would miss Jack the most, Jackie was overcome with emotion . Jack was overcome by emotion at the memorial service .
 During the flight, passengers divided into two camps, those who had served President Kennedy, and those who worked for Lyndon Johnson . Those who had worked for President Kennedy divided into one camp .
 For the duration of the flight, an uncomfortable tension filled the air . The tension was palpable throughout the plane's journey .
 Some Kennedy aides had never liked LBJ, whose chief nemesis had been the president’s own brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy . LBJ was the president's first president, and his brother was the attorney general .
 Some of President Kennedy's staffers were snobs who believed that Johnson, who had attended a teacher's college in Texas, not an elite, Ivy League university as many of them had, was their social and intellectual inferior .
 Behind his back, they called him “cornpone’s” and mocked him as a crude country hick from the Texas Hill Country . He was mocked by his friends and family for being a crude hick .
 In truth, Johnson was a master politician with a record of important achievements . Johnson was an excellent politician, with a long list of achievements .
 Johnson’s earthiness was a mask that often concealed his sophisticated grasp of events and his keen understanding of the minds and behavior of others . Johnson's earthiness often concealed the sophistication of events, says historian John Sutter .
 Without Johnson as his vice presidential running mate in 1960, it is unlikely that John Kennedy would ever have been elected president in the first place . Without Johnson, Kennedy would not have been able to be elected president .
 In their anguish, some Kennedy staffers now resented Johnson for becoming president . Some Kennedy staffers resented the former president for his success .
 The body of John Kennedy was brought home by the new president of the U.S. Forty thousand feet below the jet carrying home the body of the fallen leader .
 By midafternoon, almost everyone in America knew about the assassination . Almost everyone in the U.S. knew of the assassination.
 On the flight back, Jackie Kennedy began to plan her husband’s funeral . Jackie Kennedy planned her husband's funeral .
 Before she was done, she would oversee the biggest, most majestic public funeral in American history since the death of Abraham Lincoln ninetyeight years earlier . The funeral was the biggest public funeral for Abraham Lincoln since his death in 1863 .
 Captain Fritz returned to his office and continued to question Oswald . Oswald was killed at 3:40m. in Dallas, Texas . Oswald had been shot dead by police at the time .
 Oswald said he didn't want to stay there because Ruth Paine and her husband did not get along too well . Oswald said that he didn’t want to . stay there all the time because Ruth . Paine’s husband and his wife didn't get along, Oswald
 Oswald asked Fritz Fritz about his schooling, background, and whether he owned a car . Fritz asked Oswald some questions about his background, including his schooling and background . Fritz also asked Oswald if he had a car, and if he owned it .
 It was part of Fritz’s interrogation style to shift from one subject to another, unrelated one, to keep a suspect off balance and never allow him to get too comfortable, he says .
 Fritz’s tactics were to ask a suspect a question he already knew the answer to, and which the suspect could answer truthfully without incriminating himself . Another of Fritz's tactics was to ask him a question which he knew the answers to, which he could answer .
 Observing how a suspect behaved while telling the truth would help Fritz intuit when he was telling a lie . Observe how he behaved while he was giving the truth will help Fritz know when he's lying . Fritz would then intuit how he acted when he told the truth .
 Fritz asked what part of the building he was in at the time of the president was shot . Fritz asked Fritz if he had been in the building when the shooting occurred . Fritz says he was not in the president's office when he was killed .
 Oswald would not have been the first one he had been lulled into confessing his crime . Oswald was a master at questioning murder suspects, and Oswald would have been a master .
 I hit the officer in the show, and he hit me in the eye and I guess I deserved it. "I guess I hit him in the face," he said of the officer .
 Oswald asked Oswald what he did in the Soviet Union, and Lee told him he worked in an electronics factory . Lee told Fritz Fritz that he worked at a factory in Moscow, Russia .
 The detective might have been curious to see if Lee would lie about the sixth floor . Lee may have lied about the 6th floor, but it's not a lie .
 Oswald told Fritz Fritz that the books were kept on the third through sixth floors . Oswald said Oswald kept the books on the fourth through fifth floors of the building . The books are believed to have been on the sixth floor .
 A detective walked into Fritz’s office to tell him that some Secret Service agents, including Forrest Sorrels, were waiting to speak with him . A detective told Fritz that the agents were waiting for him to speak .
 Police detective learns several things about the suspect, including his name . The suspect was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 "He was not one of those people who, once in custody, would clam up and refuse to say a word," he said . "I'm not a person who would clam down," he added. "But I'm not afraid to say anything. He was not a man who
 His disdain for the authorities oozes from his voice, facial expressions, and body language . He said: 'His disdain for authorities oozed from his body language'
 Agent Hosty had gotten under Lee’s skin and caused him to lose his temper . Lee had lost his temper in anger over the incident .
 Fritz concluded that he, and not the FBI or the Secret Service, should remain Oswald’s principal interrogator . Fritz concluded not to be FBI, Secret Service or FBI .
 Too much direct interaction between Lee and the men from those federal agencies might be counterproductive and ruin the trust that the wily old Texan cop was trying to build with Oswald . Too much interaction between the two could be counterproductive .
 Will Fritz had a sixth sense about innocence and guilt, and truth and deception . After decades on the job, Will Fritz was a trusted confidante . Fritz: "Will Fritz had an uncanny ability to make sense of guilt and innocence"
 The detective led the Secret Service agents to a room behind his office, and then had Oswald brought in . Oswald was the only person to be brought in by the detective .
 Sorrels said no, but informed Oswald that he was free to be represented by the attorney of his choice . Oswald was not represented by an attorney, but was allowed to choose his own attorney .
 Oswald was talking about his time in the Soviet Union, but Lee became impatient . He got Oswald talking about time in Soviet Union . Lee was impatient for Oswald to talk about it, but he got impatient .
 LBJ was uncomfortable and wanted to get off the phone as soon as possible . LBJ said he was uncomfortable with the situation and wanted the phone call to end .
 Rose Kennedy did not want to linger on the phone any more than the Johnsons did . Rose Kennedy: "It's been a long way since the Kennedy administration took over the White House"
 Captain Fritz wanted to send Oswald downstairs for a lineup . Captain Fritz had wanted Oswald to be sent downstairs . Oswald had wanted to be in a lineup.
 At 4:10 p.m.o., three detectives escorted Lee out of the Homicide and Robbery office and into the hall filled with reporters, photographers, and a television camera .
 Anyone outraged by the president’s murder could pull a pistol from a pocket or a camera bag and shoot Oswald . Anyone in that hallway could pull out a pistol and shoot the president .
 Oswald's response was a classic Oswald response, one that harked back to his New Orleans radio interviews . Oswald responded with a classic response to the assassination question: "It's a classic question: 'What do you think of Oswald's life?'
 Oswald evaded the question when asked whether he had tried to renounce his American citizenship . Oswald did not give a direct answer when asked if he had done so .
 People who renounce their citizenship are not allowed to reenter the United States . Instead, he said people who renounced their citizenship were not allowed into the U.S. Instead, they were instead banned from entering the country .
 He had attempted to do that very thing as soon as he had arrived in the Soviet Union, he said . He had also attempted to take over as many as possible .
 Oswald had just exhibited the same verbal and logical tic in police custody . Oswald was taken into custody by police in the early hours of September 11 . Oswald had exhibited a similar verbal tic to a person in custody .
 Police found five bullets for his .38-caliber revolver . They found in his left pants pocket five bullets in his pants pocket .
 It was obvious that since his arrest Lee had not undergone a proper search . Lee's arrest was the first time he had been searched for more than a year . Lee was arrested on suspicion of drug possession .
 On his person the detectives also discovered his bus transfer, a few insignificant documents, and 13 dollars and eighty-seven cents . The detectives also found his bus ticket and a few documents .
 Crowds of mourners had flocked there to watch the jet land and to see Kennedy’s flag-draped coffin removed from the plane . Crowds also gathered to see the flag draped coffin of the late president .
 President Obama landed at Love Field in Dallas earlier that day . It was not unlike the scene earlier this year when the president landed in Dallas .
 Robert Kennedy, members of the cabinet, and senior government and military officials stood and watched . Robert Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 .
 The president’s brother rushed to the plane and boarded it through a front door . The president's brother boarded the plane through the front door.
 He ran down the aisle, brushing past everyone in his path, including the new president . The new president was greeted by the crowd at the White House .
 There was only one person in the world Bobby wanted to see, and she was at the back of the plane, sitting by a flag-draped coffin . Bobby's mother was sitting by the coffin as he left the plane .
 The American people were about to get their first look at Jackie Kennedy since the assassination almost five hours ago . Jackie Kennedy was about to be seen for the first time since her death at the age of 50 .
 All across the country, millions of people staring at their television screens gasped when they saw the bloodstains on her clothing . Millions of people stared at her bloodstained clothing as she left the scene .
 Jackie had still not changed out of the clothes she had worn in Dealey Plaza . Jackie had not changed her clothes since the shooting . Jackie was still wearing the clothes they had worn .
 She wanted them to bear witness to the bloodstains on her jacket, skirt, and stockings, she said . She said she wanted the public to see the blood stains .
 On television screens, as she walked to the navy ambulance, viewers saw that her legs were smeared with copious amounts of blood . Viewers also saw that she had blood on her legs .
 She wanted to sear these images into the collective memory of the American people so that they would never forget . She said she wanted the images to be seared in the collective American memory .
 To this day, decades after the assassination, the mere sight of an image of her in that suit triggers flashbacks in the minds of every person who remembers November 22, 1963 .
 President Lyndon Johnson strode toward the lights, microphones, and cameras . President Johnson was assassinated in June 1968 .
 President Johnson composed two handwritten letters on the night of November 22, November 22 . President Johnson wrote the letters in a handwritten letter .
 The orders were not orders to important U.S. government officials or communications to world leaders . They were not ordered to important United States government officials . Instead, they were ordered to respond to requests to the president .
 LBJ addressed them to the two children who had lost their father . LBJ: "I'm sorry for what I've done, but I'm not sorry for it."
 Air Force One takes off from Love Field in Dallas, Texas . Another plane departs Love Field shortly after the president takes off .
 C-130 cargo plane ferried the president’s Lincoln Continental limousine to Texas . It was the plane that had ferried it to the president's Lincoln Continental .
 Secret Service agents had driven the car from Parkland Hospital back to Love Field . Secret service agents had been driving the car back to the airport .
 At the hospital, an agent removed the two flags that hung from the flagpoles on the hood during the motorcade . The two flags are one bearing the presidential seal and the American flag .
 The car was driven to the White House garage, where it was hidden from view . Agents drove it to the garage, hiding it from view in Washington, D.C.
 Color photographs taken of it there reveal bloodstains on the two-tone blue leather upholstery . Bloodstains are also visible on the leather leather seats .
 President Kennedy’s body was not yet ready to go home to the White House . President Kennedy's body was still in the Air Force at the time of his death .
 First, accompanied by Jackie, a navy ambulance took him to Bethesda Naval Hospital . The hospital is across the Maryland border from Washington .
 Kennedy had been a naval officer, so he chose Bethesda Naval Hospital . Jackie Kennedy was the first lady to visit the hospital .
 Jackie was taken to a waiting room on the seventeenth floor of the hospital . She was taken there by a woman who had been in a coma for four years .
 A suspect has been arrested for the president's murder, the president’s brother Robert told her . The suspect is a suspect in the murder of the president, President Barack Obama's wife .
 The “little communist” was back in Captain Fritz’s office for more questioning . The "little communist" was back at the top of the list .
 Oswald was questioned for ten minutes by federal agents, then led out into a hall crammed with reporters . Oswald was led out of the hall of reporters at 7:28 PM .
 Oswald remained evasive and did not give a direct answer to the question . Oswald was evasive in front of the cameras during the interview .
 The detective asked if he brought one with him when he came back to Dallas from New Orleans . The detective said he had a gun with him, but it was not a gun .
 Oswald retorted that the people will forget that within a few days, and there will be another president . Oswald: "There will be a new president. Oswald retorts that . The people forget that," Oswald said .
 The president’s casket was placed on a cart and wheeled to a room where pathologists and technicians waited to examine him .
 Attendants removed his body from the casket, laid him on a table, and unwound the plastic wrapping . Attendants remove the body from a casket and unwold the plastic wrap .
 They photographed his face, which had been undamaged by the bullets, and his head, which was ravaged by one . They photographed him in the aftermath of the shooting .
 They photographed his neck wound, then rolled him over to photograph his back wound . They rolled him up to photograph the back wound and neck wound .
 Doctors did not need to saw off the top of his head to recover what remained of his brain . Doctors say he was lucky not to have to be cut off his brain to save his life .
 After examining it, they sealed it in a Stainless-steel container with a screw-top lid . It was sealed in stainless steel .
 Hours passed, but Jackie Kennedy refused to leave or sleep . Hours later, she was still waiting on the seventeenth floor of the hotel .
 After pathologists finished their work, the morticians arrived to prepare the president for burial . The president was buried in a hospital in Bethsada .
 The president's corpse was prepared for an open-coffin viewing . Kennedy would choose an open or closed-in viewing before the funeral, undertakers prepared the president’s corpse .
 Doctors concealed the tracheotomy incision that the Dallas doctors had made in his neck . The Dallas doctors concealed the incision they made in the neck of the man .
 The side of John Kennedy’s skull that the fatal bullet had blown open is reconstructed . It is the most difficult task of reconstructing the side of Kennedy's skull that blew open .
 A White House courier brought a selection of eight of the president’s suits, four pairs of shoes, plus shirts and ties for the morticians to dress him . The morticians will dress him up in a suit and tie .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was giving a press conference in a hall in a Dallas police station . Oswald was in the hall at the time of the assassination . Oswald gave a press call as surgeons cut open President Kennedy's corpse .
 "Nobody has told me anything except that I am accused of, ah, of murdering a policeman," he says . He says he is accused of killing a police officer .
 Oswald’s face changed in an instant, to an appearance of stunned despair . Oswald's expression on Oswald's face changed into an expression of stunned disbelief . Oswald was shot dead at the scene of the Second World War .
 Oswald's first official press conference had lasted six minutes . Oswald’s first public press conference was six minutes before his death . Oswald was the only person in the world to be shot at the scene .
 It was odd that the prime suspect in the murder of the president of the U.S. was giving a press conference at all .
 Oswald was taken back to his cell, only to be called out again for a second fingerprinting session . Oswald's fingerprinting was the first time he had been fingerprinted . Oswald has been held in a federal prison in Texas .
 Oswald was given a paraffin test to determine if he had fired a gun . The test was carried out late in the night . Oswald was shot at the White House in Washington, D.C. in September 1945 .
 Oswald told Oswald that he was wasting his time and that he did not know anything about the murders . Oswald told him that he had no idea what happened to the victims . Oswald said that Oswald was wasting time and said that he didn't know anything .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was roused from his cell and taken to see a man on the fourth floor of city hall . Oswald was taken to the fourth-floor floor of the building in New York City . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound .
 Oswald knew only one thing, and Oswald knew it . Oswald's early-morning summons could only be the result of an early morning summons . Oswald knew he was being summoned to the White House .
 He was told again that he would have the opportunity to contact the lawyer of his choice . He was given the option to contact his lawyer of choice .
 The morticians did not finish until after three A.M. on Saturday, November 23 . Once they had, Jackie could take the president's body home to the White House .
 Jackie got in the gray navy ambulance and sat next to her husband’s coffin . Jackie sat in the ambulance next to the coffin .
 The driver, Bill Greer, was the Secret Service agent who had driven the presidential limousine in the motorcade in Dallas . Greer was behind the wheel .
 The ambulance and a small motorcade left Bethesda at 3:56 A.M., making its way down Wisconsin Avenue to Massachusetts Avenue, then to Twentieth Street on its way to the White House .
 In the middle of the night, those in the motorcade were surprised to see people standing vigil on the sidewalks and cars pulled over along the route . The motorcade was the first of its kind to take part in a motorcade .
 This was the slain president’s first funeral procession . Impromptu as it was, this was the first of several in the days to come . The funeral procession was impromptu .
 Taz Shepard, Kennedy’s naval aide, telephoned from the White House to the U.S. Marine Corps barracks at Eighth and I streets .
 The Commander in Chief has been assassinated, and I want a squad at the White House double-quick, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Sutter says he wants a squad of White House officers to investigate the assassination .
 At the barracks, a contingent of Marines awoke, donned their dress blue uniforms in record time, and arrived at the White House in 17 minutes . The Marines arrived in record-setting time .
 Flaming torches illuminated their path as they marched through the gate and onto the White House grounds . The group marched into the gates of the presidential residence on Thursday .
 They were in place before the ambulance carrying the president’s body arrived .
 At 4:34m. , a military honor guard carried the coffin up the steps of the portico, through the hall, and into the East Room . Lincoln had once lain in repose in the room where he had once been .
 Jackie Kennedy's funeral was the first public clue about what kind of funeral Jackie Kennedy had in mind . The funeral was held at the Kennedy's home in Washington, D.C.
 This eerie scene, unfolding in silence in the middle of the night, was sad but touching in its simplicity . The eerie scene unfolded in silence and was sad and touching .
 For now, she goes upstairs to the family suite on the second floor of the White House .
 There in the privacy of her bedroom, she undressed, removing her suit, stockings, and other garments, stained by the tragedy she had suffered that day . She undressed and removed her suit and stockings .
 Under normal conditions, the Executive Mansion would be dark and almost empty at this hour . The Executive Mansion is dark and empty, but is almost empty .
 A military honor guard in the East Room stood watch over a dead president through the night . The honor guard was in place of the late President Obama .
 Every guest bedroom was occupied by Kennedy family members or close friends . The Kennedy family lived in every guest bedroom in the Kennedy home .
 Jackie's mother, at her daughter’s insistence, slept in the president's bedroom . Jackie slept in her mother's bedroom at the request of her daughter .
 The president's children had been put to bed hours ago knowing that their father was dead but without the comfort of seeing their mother . The president’s children were put to sleep hours ago .
 Cabinet members, military officers, and friends of Jackie roamed through the halls, held quiet conversations, took catnaps on furniture, ate sandwiches, or tried to do something . Cabinet members and military officers were among them .
 Jack and Jackie were introduced to each other at a dinner party at Charlie Bartlett's home . Bartlett introduced the couple to Jack at a party at his home . The couple has been married for more than 50 years .
 Anyone, and fortunately there were many, who knew him briefly and over long periods, felt that a bright and quickening impulse had come into his life . Anyone, or any of his friends, knew him, felt he had a bright, quickening instinct .
 He had uncommon courage, unfailing humor and a penetrating, ever curious intelligence, and over all a matchless grace . He was a great leader, says CNN.com's John Sutter .
 He will not be replaced, nor will he be forgotten, for in truth he was a kind of cheerful lightning who touched us all . He will be remembered for his "cheerful lightning" that touched all .
 We will remember always with love and sometimes, as the years pass and the story is retold, with a little wonder . We will always remember always, as well as always, with love, and with wonder .
 That lightsome tread, that debonair touch, that shock of chestnut hair, that beguiling grin, that shattering understatement—these are what we shall remember . That light-hearted touch, a debuirious grin, and a shattering understatement .
 At eight fifteen on the morning of Saturday, November 23, she met with her children to talk to them about their father’s death . She met with them to discuss their father's death .
 Jackie's mother deputized the children’s beloved nanny, Maud Shaw, to tell them . She knew she would not arrive home before their bedtime, so she deputed the children's nanny .
 Shaw begged to be relieved of the responsibility of telling two young children their father was dead . Shaw did not want to do it and begged for the help of telling the children .
 At 10:00m. on the twenty-third, Jackie attended a private mass in the East Room for the president’s friends and family . Jackie attended the private mass .
 Staff members were already cleaning out the Oval Office in the West Wing . Elsewhere in the White House, staff members are already busy cleaning out .
 Evelyn Lincoln, John Kennedy’s personal secretary since his years in the Senate, gathered papers and personal mementoes from his desk . A tearful Evelyn . Lincoln gathered papers from Kennedy's desk . Kennedy was Kennedy's Senate seat in the 1960s .
 A pair of JFK’s famous rocking chairs was removed at 1:31 P.M., loaded onto a handcart, and rolled across a driveway to the Old Executive Office Building, an annex of the White House . The rocking chairs were removed from JFK's famous rocking chair at
 A photograph of them, one turned upside down and stacked upon the other, became a symbol of the rapid transition . A photo of the two turned upside-down and stacked on top of each other, the image was a symbol .
 There was a lot of grumbling among some of President Kennedy’s staffers about the new president . President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 .
 A number of officials had advised Johnson to occupy the presidential office at once as a symbol of the continuity of government, and he did so .
 Johnson’s actions caused Kennedy staffers to murmur that it was unseemly and in poor taste for the new president to move into the White House so quickly .
 The Oval Office is in the West Wing, which is in a separate building that is connected to the main house by a colonnade . But the Oval Office, in the west Wing, is in an adjacent building .
 Lyndon Johnson had not moved into the White House . The historic rooms contained the historic rooms as well as the president’s private living quarters . The White House was the president's private quarters .
 Johnson was emphatic that Jackie and her children should continue to live there as long as she wished . Johnson said Jackie should be allowed to continue her family's life in the home .
 Mary Todd Lincoln had stayed on in the White House for more than a month after her husband’s assassination . Lyndon Johnson believed that Jackie Kennedy, and not he, should decide when she should move out .
 Jackie Lee decided her husband should be buried at Arlington National Cemetery . The historic graveyard was established during the Civil War on General Robert E Lee’s estate, across the Potomac River from the White House .
 Thousands of soldiers from the Civil War, World War I, and World War II had been buried there . Thousands of them are buried there, including those from the Korean War and Civil War .
 On the way to Arlington, the motorcade stopped at the Pentagon to pick up Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara . The motorcade was headed to Arlington from the Pentagon .
 It was cold and raining when Jackie Kennedy arrived at Arlington Cemetery to inspect the proposed site for her husband’s grave .
 It was a lovely spot of ground in front of the old Lee mansion in Washington . It enjoyed a panoramic view of Washington .
 Jackie remembered that when John had visited this spot a few months before, he said it was so beautiful that he could stay there forever . Jackie remembered when John said he could 'stay forever' at this spot .
 Lee Harvey Oswald woke up on Saturday, November 23, after his first night in police custody . Oswald was taken into custody in Dallas, Texas, on November 23 . Oswald had been in custody since November 24, 1945 .
 Oswald had ordered the weapon by mail from a sporting goods store in Chicago . The serial number of the weapon was stamped into the weapon . The FBI would find records proving that Oswald ordered it by mail .
 Oswald used postal money order Oswald had used to pay for rifle . Order form and money order were found in Oswald's home . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 Oswald was subject to a total of twelve hours of questioning after his arrest . Oswald was never charged with any crime in connection with the assassination .
 He actually seemed to enjoy the attention as he toyed with the Dallas police, FBI, and Secret Service interrogators .
 Oswald was brought to Captain Fritz’s office at 10:35m. on Saturday, November 23, and the questioning continued . Oswald was taken to the Captain Fritz's office, where he was questioned again . Oswald died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head in
 When he got off he got a transfer and used it to take another bus to the theatre where he was arrested . He then used the bus to get another bus and took it to another theatre . He was arrested at the end of the day .
 There was no reason for him to lie about taking a cab, it would have been a harmless admission . It was no longer a lie, but it was an admission that he took a cab .
 Fritz asked if he brought curtain rods to work on the morning of the assassination . Fritz asked about whether curtain rods he brought to work were curtain rods . Fritz: "I don't bring curtain rods with me to work every day"
 Oswald denied having a conversation with Wesley Frazier about curtain rods or taking them into the Depository . Oswald denied taking curtain rods into the depository .
 Frazier did not tell Frazier that he was in the process of fixing up his apartment . He did not say he was going to fix it up . Frazier says he did not know he was fixing up the apartment .
 Or that the reason for his visit to Irving on the night of November 21 was to obtain some curtain rods from Mrs. Mrs. Johnson . Or that he was going to get some curtain rod from her? Or that was the reason .
 One was named “Junior” and he could not remember the name of the other one . One of the two was named "Junior" and the other was named Junior .
 Oswald asked Oswald what friends or relatives of his lived nearby and whether he’d ever had any visitors at his rooming house on Beckley Street . Fritz asked Oswald if he had any family members of his family who lived nearby . Oswald said no one had ever visited Oswald's room
 Oswald said he had never ordered guns, and did not have receipts for any . Oswald says he did not order guns and has never received any receipts for them .
 Oswald had no receipts, he implied, then that must be proof that he had ordered no firearms . Oswald had receipts, the president implied, but that must have been proof of ordering no firearms. Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Oswald admitted he bought the revolver about seven months ago . Oswald refused to answer any more questions about the revolver or any other guns until he talked to a lawyer . Oswald admitted to buying the revolver but refused to give more questions .
 Oswald could not resist showing off his knowledge and superiority, witness says . Witness: Oswald showed off his superiority and knowledge . Oswald was a genius, according to witness to the interrogation .
 Oswald boasted he was familiar with all types of questioning and would not make any statements . Oswald boasted that he would not be making any statements during questioning . Oswald said he was not afraid to make statements .
 Oswald said that the FBI was abusive and impolite when they spoke to Marina three weeks ago . Oswald said the FBI called Marina Marina 'abusive' and 'impolite' Marina Oswald said .
 Oswald knew where the detective was going and wanted to foreclose any hint of motive . Oswald knew what he was going to do, wanted to clear up any clue of motive for the killing .
 He said he would not take one for the FBI in 1962, and would not do it now for the Dallas police . Dallas police chief says he's not interested in taking a job .
 Fritz confronted Oswald with one of two Selective Service cards that he carried in his wallet at the time of his arrest . Oswald confronted Fritz with the card that he had been carrying since his arrest in November .
 authentic United States military Selective Service cards did not use photographs, so this card was an obvious forgery . Authentic U.S. Selective . Service cards used photographs, but authentic . Selective service cards used photos of soldiers .
 Oswald refused to admit whether he signed the card with the name Hidell . Oswald refused not to admit to having signed card with Hidell's name .
 He conceded that he carried the card but refused to say what purpose it was for . He said he was carrying the card for what purpose .
 Fritz allowed Secret Service inspector Thomas Kelley to ask a question . Fritz allowed Kelley to speak to the Secret Service . Fritz: "I'm not afraid to ask questions"
 Oswald was isolated from other prisoners and had not been allowed to watch television or see newspapers . Oswald had been isolated from others prisoners and not allowed to see newspapers or television .
 Unless a policeman, FBI agent, or Secret Service agent had told Oswald about Connally’s wounds, Oswald would not have known he had shot him too . Connally's wounds would have kept Oswald from knowing he shot him .
 Oswald might have wondered how he had managed to shoot a man he had never had in his sights . Oswald shot JFK in the head in the early hours of September 4, 1963 . Oswald had never been in the sights of the president .
 Marina Oswald was allowed to meet with her husband for the first time since the assassination . Marina Oswald met with Jackie Kennedy while Jackie Kennedy was selecting a grave site .
 She had not seen him for about thirty hours—enough time for him to ruin their lives . She was worried he was going to ruin her life .
 Marina was afraid—afraid that her husband had finally gone and done something crazy, that he had actually murdered the president of the United States and a policeman . Marina feared she was afraid .
 She was afraid the United States government might imprison her or deport her to the Soviet Union . Having grown up in a totalitarian state, she grew up in the U.S. government .
 The victims were innocent people in Communist countries who had any connection to enemies of the state . Worse things than that have happened to innocent people who had connections to enemies .
 Marina and her mother-in-law were taken to the fourthfloor visiting room at 1:15 pm. At 1:30pm, Marina was taken to a visiting room . Marina was accompanied by her mother in-law .
 He must have known his life with Marina and the children was over forever, he said . He said he knew his life was over when he died .
 At worst, he would be put to death in the electric chair, probably within a year . At worst he would die in a year at worst .
 A few years earlier, Marina was an unsophisticated Russian teenage girl who found herself smitten with a minor immigrant celebrity who sweet-talked her into marriage and then into leaving her family and immigrating to America .
 Life here was not what he promised, and he was not the man he had pretended to be . But life here was what he had promised, he said . He was not a man he'd pretended be .
 His unstable nature had taken him on a quixotic psychological journey that had climaxed in the murder of the president of the U.S. Now, after she had entrusted him with her life and had borne him two children, his unstable nature .
 As the wife of the accused assassin, she was fast becoming the most notorious woman in America . Her husband is accused of being an assassin .
 Lee Oswald had no sense of the enormity of what he had done to her, he gave no sign of it now . Lee Oswald, who had committed a crime against the president, was silent at the end of his speech .
 He remained calm and spoke as though nothing had happened, as though he was in jail for a traffic offense or a shoplifting charge . He spoke calmly and calmly after the incident .
 He had given her advice before he set out to assassinate General Walker . That was the same advice he gave her in his note to her . General Walker had told her to kill General Walker.
 She did not need to see him again to reach a conclusion about his guilt, she said . But she didn't need to visit him again, she did need to reach that conclusion .
 He did not complain of mistreatment by the authorities, and that was not like him . That is not what he did, he said, but that is what he said .
 He was always a complainer, and now he sputtered no outraged proclamations of his innocence . Now he sputter no outrage at his innocence, and no outrage . He is always a Complainer, but now he has a voice in his opinion .
 When Marina looked into her husband's eyes, she knew, as she later told investigators, that he had killed the president . Marina told investigators: "I knew he'd killed me. He had killed me," she said .
 At 1:07 pm., a few minutes before Lee and Marina began their reunion, District Attorney Henry Wade gave an impromptu interview to the press on the fourth floor of the city jail .
 In the spring and summer of 1865, a military court of nine judges tried eight of John Wilkes Booth’s alleged co-conspirators in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln and the attempted murder of William Seward .
 Four of the defendants were sentenced to death, and they were hanged . A court sentenced four of them to death . Four of them were hanged by a court .
 At 2:05 p.M., Captain Will Fritz followed Wade’s comments with some of his own . Captain Fritz: “I’m not going to be surprised by the comments,” he said .
 "This man killed the president. I can tell you that this case is cinched," CNN's John Sutter says .
 Robert Oswald was allowed to see his brother, in the same room where Lee had met with Marina . Oswald was finally allowed to visit his brother at 3:37 PM .
 The suspect is charged with shooting the president and a police officer . He was shot in the head with a rifle, pistol and rifle, police say .
 Lee was under arrest for a double homicide, and his mind was distracted by the trivial subject of footwear for a toddler . Lee was arrested for the murder of two people, but was distracted from his arrest .
 Dallas police paraded Lee Harvey Oswald many times before newspaper reporters and television cameras . Dallas police often paraded Oswald before reporters and TV cameras .
 In a crowded hallway, they allowed him to make several public statements that were filmed and broadcast across the country . The incident was captured on camera in a hallway .
 The prosecutor discussed the case against Oswald in front of reporters and pronounced him guilty . Oswald was found guilty in a federal court in New York .
 Oswald raised his handcuffed hands and, for several seconds, clenched his right fist into what appeared to be a Communist salute . Oswald's hands were handcuffed and his hands were tied to his cuffed .
 Oswald complained to journalists that his “fundamental hygienic rights” were being violated . Oswald complained that the police would not allow him to take a shower . Oswald also complained that he was not allowed to shower in jail .
 He told reporters he had a cut above his eye because a policeman had hit him . He said he had been hit by a policeman and was hit by the officer .
 He asked for a lawyer several times, but the police and prosecutors ignored him, he says . He says he was denied access to a lawyer by police, prosecutors and the police .
 A policeman walked through a crowded hallway holding Oswald’s rifle above his head like a cheap bowling trophy . A policeman held the rifle up to his head . Oswald's rifle was found in Oswald's apartment in 1963 .
 The Dallas Police Department allowed its headquarters to deteriorate into a carnival-like spectacle . The Dallas police department's headquarters was transformed into a circus-like scene .
 Shouting, pushing reporters packed the halls and, like jackals, became frenzied whenever police teased them with a glimpse of their prisoner . Shouting and pushing reporters pack the halls .
 Oswald claimed, “I’m just a patsy,” by which he meant that he was the fall guy for whoever committed the crime . Oswald claimed to have been the "fall guy" for the crime, then said he was just a "patsy
 When a third reporter asked if he was the gunman—“Did you fire that rifle?”—Oswald uttered an emotional denial . “I’m not the shooter,” he said. ‘I'm not the gunman,’ he said
 No one checked IDs or searched journalists who crowded the hallway . No one searched journalists or checked IDs .
 The assassination had stained the city's and its police department’s reputations . The assassination was a stain on the reputation of the police department's reputation .
 There was talk that the people of Dallas shared some kind of collective guilt for the murder . There was disturbing talk that Dallas residents were responsible for the killing .
 The police wanted the press to say good things about Dallas, so they gave the press free rein . The police gave reporters free rein, allowing them to speak freely about Dallas .
 Oswald’s life was in danger when he was killed, Oswald's life was put in danger . Oswald's death was a fateful decision that impeded their investigation and put his life in danger, Oswald says .
 Abraham Zapruder’s home movie was released on November 23, 1941 . It was the first time Zapruders had made a home movie .
 Journalists desperate to purchase the rights to his film went to his office to meet with him . Journalists wanted to buy the rights of his film .
 After Jackie returned from Arlington Cemetery, she remained in seclusion at the White House .
 Aside from morning mass, she participated in no other events that day .
 In two days, on Monday, November 25, she had to preside over two events that would test her body and soul . She had to be ready for two days to prepare for the events .
 Jackie Kennedy threw herself into planning the event . With meticulous attention to detail, Jackie Kennedy was meticulous in planning .
 The White House entrances and East Room chandeliers had been draped in mourning with ribbons of black crepe paper . The exact way that the White House entrance and chandelier were draped with mourning ribbons had been .
 In two days, on the day of his father’s funeral, he would be three years old . He would be 3 when he turns three .
 President Lyndon Johnson read to the nation over live radio and television his proclamation of a national day of mourning for President Kennedy .
 Lyndon B Johnson appoints Monday, November 25, the day of the funeral service of President Kennedy, to be a national day of mourning throughout the United States .
 "I earnestly recommend the people to assemble on that day in their respective places of divine worship," he writes . "I urge the people ... to pay their homage of love and reverence to the memory of a great and good man"
 Oswald was transferred from the jail in City Hall to the County Jail about a mile away . Police Chief Jesse Curry asked for a tip on when Oswald would be transferred from jail to county jail .
 Friday, through the middle of the night, and then all day Saturday into the evening. Saturday through the night. Saturday . Saturday into Saturday . Friday . Saturday . Sunday . Saturday night . Sunday night .
 They wanted to leave so they could take a break and rest, but they worried that the prisoner would be moved in the middle of the night when they were gone and that they would miss out on the story . The prisoners wanted to stay in the story but were worried that they might miss
 The chief told them it was safe for them to leave, and promised that the suspect would not be moved tonight . The chief also promised to keep the suspect at home .
 Oswald will be moved tomorrow morning . Oswald will remain in Fritz’s third floor office at the end of the day .
 The body of John F Kennedy lay in repose at the White House at the night of November 23 .
 Death threats against Oswald began after midnight on Sunday, November 24 . Oswald has been accused of being the subject of numerous death threats .
 Anonymous caller: "Tonight, tomorrow morning, or tomorrow night, we are going to kill the man who killed the president" Anonymous man: "I represent a committee that is neither right nor left wing" Anonymous caller says he represents a committee neither left nor right wing .
 The night man at the office who had taken the message informed an agent, Milton L Newsom, of the threat . Milton Newsom was the only person in the office to receive the message .
 The purpose of the call was to warn the sheriff’s office in advance so no deputies would get hurt when Oswald was shot to death tomorrow . Oswald's death will be marked by the death of the president .
 Agent Newsom also called the Dallas Police Department and reported the threats to Captain William B Frazier . The threats were reported to Captain Frazier .
 At 5:15 A.M., Frazier called Captain Will Fritz at home, who told him to notify Chief Curry . Frazier called Fritz at his home, Fritz said he'd notify Curry . Chief Curry was the first officer to contact Frazier .
 Deputy Sheriff McCoy had reported the threats to Sheriff Bill Decker, who became alarmed . Sheriff Decker became alarmed when McCoy reported them to the sheriff .
 Chief Curry told McCoy to call the Dallas police and tell them he wanted Chief Curry to call him right away . Chief Curry said McCoy should call the police chief immediately . McCoy called the police and said he wanted the chief to call his office immediately .
 Decker thought the Dallas Police should drive Oswald over to the county jail right now . Decker thought Oswald should be taken to the Dallas County Jail .
 The transfer will be over before reporters gather at City Hall . That way, the transfer will take place before the reporters gather . It's a good time to get rid of potential assassins and reporters .
 Talbert reached the assistant chief of police, who told him to send men to Curry’s house . Talbert called the police to report the incident .
 Talbert also called FBI agent Newsom, the man who first spread word of the threats . Talbert called Newsom around 7:30M. ET .
 Talbert said that Chief Curry would not be in the office until 8:00 or 9:00 a.m. Talbert: Chief Curry is not expected to be in office until either 8:30 or 9,00m. He said Chief Curry will be in his office until
 Police wanted to maintain good relations with press, says Oswald's lawyer . Oswald was arrested at the time of Oswald's murder in Dallas, Texas, in 1961 . Oswald died in August 1963 .
 The media had set up extensive coverage to cover the transfer of Chief Curry . Chief Curry did not think that Chief Curry would want to “cross” the media, he said .
 Before OSWALD went anywhere that morning, Captain Will Fritz wanted to see him for one last time . Captain Fritz wanted him to meet him before he left the hospital .
 After two days of trying, Fritz knew he could not break Oswald’s willpower, frighten him, or trick him into confessing . Oswald was the only person to confess to the murder of his wife . Oswald's story is published in The Washington Post .
 'Yes, he had exploded in occasional flashes of anger and frustration, but he always reeled himself back in to a state of calm. Yes, he has exploded but he had never exploded in such a way,’ he said. ‘Yes, yes. Yes. Yes
 Not even the sight of his wife or brother weakened him or compelled him to confess, he says . "Not even the . sight of . his wife, brother or sister weakened him," he writes .
 Captain Will Fritz spoke with Oswald before he was transferred from the city jail . Oswald's last chance to speak freely with Fritz was before he got a lawyer . The grand jury, prosecutor, and trial would claim center stage .
 First-day evidence alone alone was enough to indict Oswald and put him on trial . Oswald's trial was held in New York City, New York, in the 1920s .
 Oswald wanted the psychological satisfaction of hearing it from Oswald’s own lips . But the old detective wanted to hear it from his own lips, he says . Oswald was killed in November 1963 in Dallas, Texas .
 This was the most notorious case of Fritz’s career, but the legendary lawman had failed to break the president's assassin . Fritz's most famous case was the assassination of President Lincoln Lincoln in 1877 .
 Fritz says the threat was for the federal authorities, not Fritz, to make . But that kind of threat was not a threat, Fritz says . Fritz: "The federal authorities should not have been able to make such a threat"
 Fritz showed Oswald one of the “backyard’s photographs of him holding the rifle he claimed he never owned . Oswald showed Oswald a photograph of him with the rifle . Oswald claimed he had never owned the rifle, Fritz said .
 The detective hoped that once Oswald saw this undeniable proof, he might confess . Oswald saw the undeniable proof of Oswald's guilt, the detective hoped .
 He denied any involvement in or knowledge of the Kennedy or Tippit shootings . He also denied knowledge of any involvement with the Kennedy shootings .
 Oswald said he rented it at the main post office a few months before moving to New Orleans . Oswald says he had rented the post office at the time . Oswald said it was a rental at the New Orleans post office .
 Chief of Police Curry gave a hallway press conference at 10:20 A.M. on Sunday morning . Chief Curry gave the press conference in a hallway hallway .
 Oswald's men will transport Oswald to the County Jail on Sunday, he says . On Saturday night he had already told reporters the approximate time his men would transport Oswald . Oswald will be taken to jail on Sunday morning .
 Now he has revealed what special methods he would use to keep his prisoner safe from harm .
 The reporters wanted to know if the police had discovered any accomplices . They asked if they had found accomplices in the case of the suspect .
 Curry did not go so far as to deny the possibility of a conspiracy . Curry: "There is no doubt that there is a conspiracy. It is not a conspiracy"
 The journalists kept questioning Curry, but he had nothing more to say . Curry said: "I don't know what I'm going to say"
 Inspector Kelley asked Oswald if he believed in what the FPCC stands for . Oswald says he does not believe in what he believes in FPCC . Oswald is accused of being a member of the Communist Party in Russia .
 Oswald denied that he had moved to Dallas to start an FPCC chapter there . Oswald denies that he moved to start a chapter in Dallas, Texas .
 Oswald said he doubted that the attitude of the U.S. government would change . Oswald: "I doubt that the attitudes of the United States government will change"
 Fritz asked the same question Oswald answered on the New Orleans radio shows . Oswald answered the question on the radio shows in New Orleans . Fritz asked Oswald if he would be able to come up with the answer .
 Secret Service agent Kelley asked if Oswald subscribed to any Russian magazines or newspapers . Kelley asked whether Oswald had ever subscribed to a Russian magazine or newspaper .
 Oswald revealed when he was standing in front of the Depository, about to leave, a young crew-cut man rushed up and said he was from the Secret Service, showed him a book of identification, and asked where the phone was . Oswald revealed that a young man asked him to
 Oswald pointed him toward the pay phone in the building, and he started toward it, but then Oswald left . Oswald told him to go to a pay phone, and then he left .
 Fritz switched to a subject guaranteed to infuriate Oswald, the circumstances of his parting with the Marine Corps. Oswald was asked to explain why he parted with the Marines . Oswald was a Marine, but Fritz said he left the Marine to be a Marine .
 It was changed later because he attempted to renounce his American citizenship while living in Russia . His citizenship was later changed because he was living in Moscow .
 Because he never changed his citizenship, he wrote a letter to secretary of the Navy John Connally to have this discharge reversed . After considerable delay, he received a “very respectful” reply in which Connally stated that he had resigned to run for governor .
 Fritz asked about a map that was found in Oswald’s room at the boardinghouse . Oswald was a member of the Boardinghouse .
 Fritz knew what Fritz was implying, that the map was evidence that he had planned the assassination in advance . He knew what he meant, that Fritz was insinuating .
 He had used a map to plot out his route when he went from place to place in search of employment . He used it to plot his route to find employment .
 The X that he penned in front of the Depository did not foreshadow the assassination . It was not the first time he had penned the X . The X was not intended to foreshadow JFK's assassination .
 Oswald would be taken to the basement garage of City Hall and driven to the County Jail . Oswald was taken to City Hall's basement garage, driven to County Jail, where he would be held in jail . Oswald would then be taken back to jail .
 Captain Fritz asked Oswald one more time about the hours before the assassination . Captain Fritz also asked Oswald about his time in the days leading up to the shooting .
 Oswald knew Wesley and his sister had already told the police all about his large paper bag . Oswald knew that Wesley's sister and brother already told police about the bag . Wesley and sister were already telling the police .
 He tried to discredit the accuracy of their recollections by creating ambiguity about its size, he said . He said the size of the memorial was not the size .
 Frazier asked where Oswald put the sack when he got into Frazier’s car . Fritz pursued the subject, asking where Oswald had the sack . Oswald had been in the car with Frazier .
 Wesley Frazier says he brought a long parcel over to his house and put it in the backseat of his car . Fritz told Oswald that Wesley Frazier . Frazier says that he brought over the parcel over . to his home . Frazier .
 Oswald asked Fritz to tell him again where he was in the Depository at the time of the assassination . Fritz asked Oswald to tell Oswald where he had been at the scene of the shooting .
 Oswald told the story in the same way he had during a prior interrogation . The detective was curious to see if Oswald would tell the story differently . Oswald had been questioned by a detective .
 Oswald stopped in the second-floor lunchroom to get a Coke, Oswald said . Oswald said he encountered a policeman in the lunchroom . Oswald says he was confronted by a police officer .
 On November 22, he told Captain Fritz that during the assassination, he was eating his lunch on the first floor of the Depository and then he went up to the second floor to buy a Coke . He said he was buying a Coke at the time .
 Oswald did not go down to the first floor to eat his lunch . Oswald's lunch was the first time he had gone to the second floor of the White House . Oswald was killed in November 1945 .
 He says the assassination and all the ‘commotion’ happened before he had a chance to go down to the first floor and eat his lunch . Now he says all the "commotion" happened before the assassination . He says he had to go back down the stairs to eat
 Oswald confessed that he was not on the first floor of the building when the president was shot . Oswald had just confessed to being in the building at the time of the president's assassination .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was not on the first floor during the assassination of President Kennedy . Oswald was on the second floor of the White House when the assassination occurred .
 Oswald had slipped up at last . It had taken Fritz almost two days and several rounds of interrogation to get to this moment . Oswald slipped up last night .
 The suspect had placed himself alone on one of the upper floors of the building from which the president was shot . The suspect is believed to have been in the building at the time of the shooting .
 Fritz might be able to coax Oswald into making more mistakes and admissions . Given several more hours of questioning, Fritz might have coaxed Oswald into more admissions .
 Secret Service agent Forrest Sorrels asked Oswald about the mysterious Alex Hidell . Hidell was a member of the U.S. National Security Council .
 You took notes, just read them for yourself, if you want to refresh your memory . Take notes for yourself .
 He would not admit that he used the name under which he ordered the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle . Despite the incriminating evidence of the card he kept in his wallet, he kept it in a wallet .
 Assistant Chief of Police Charles Batchelor selected the best truck, the one with room for two guards to ride with Oswald . Oswald was found dead at the scene of the shooting . Oswald had been shot in the head by police officers .
 Batchelor and the driver decided to leave the vehicle at the top of the ramp with the front end protruding onto the sidewalk . The front end of the vehicle protruded onto the street .
 Oswald would have to walk through the basement garage and then up the ramp to reach the back of the armored car . Oswald's armored car would be in the basement of a basement garage .
 The steep incline might cause the truck to stall on the way up the exit ramp . But if the truck were backed all the way down the ramp, it might stall . The truck could be backed down the exit .
 Captain Fritz told Chief Curry he was ready to bring Oswald down as soon as the seventy policemen in the basement had secured the area . Chief Curry told him he would be brought down once the police were secured .
 Anyone who tried to get Oswald would find themselves attacking an empty armored car . Oswald's armored car would be empty, he says . Oswald would be the only person to try and get Oswald .
 Fritz planned to cut out of the caravan at Main Street, drive west on Main to Houston, then make a right turn to the county jail . He planned to drive to Houston to Houston and make a trip to the jail .
 Oswald's basement was cleared of everybody but law enforcement officials . Oswald would have been a lot easier to protect Oswald if the basement had been cleared . Oswald was killed in the raid on the White House .
 Oswald suggested to Fritz Fritz that they take Oswald out on the first floor and put him in a car on Main Street . Oswald had suggested that he be taken out of the building and put into a car . Fritz suggested that Oswald should be put in the car .
 Assign a small contingent of reliable detectives to march Oswald right out of the front door . Assign them to a small squad of detectives who will march Oswald out .
 Fritz wondered if the number of men needed to guard Oswald could be squeezed into the elevator . Fritz wondered how many men would be needed to protect Oswald .
 Chief Curry would insist on letting the press see the transfer, he says . Chief Curry will insist on releasing the transfer from the police force, he adds .
 Oswald was dressed in a T-shirt, and Fritz worried that Lee might get cold . Oswald was wearing a t-shirt when he died .
 Fritz sent a man to bring some of the clothing the police found at 1026 North Beckley Street in Oswald’s little room . Fritz sent him to bring the clothing police found in Oswald's room .
 Lee asked for what he described as a black ‘Ivy League’ shirt . At first he asked for a black Ivy League shirt . Lee says he wanted a black shirt, but it wasn't black .
 Lee pulled the sweater over his head and pushed his arms through the sleeves . Lee pulled it over his shoulders and put his arms in the sleeves to his arms . The sweater was one of the most important pieces of his life .
 It was the last of many warnings not to expose the prisoner to unnecessary danger . The prisoner's last warning was 'not to expose him to unnecessary harm'
 A pasty-complexioned, unattractive man wearing a dark suit, white shirt, dark tie, dark hat and dark shoes approached the mouth of the driveway and the armored car parked at the top of the ramp .
 He slipped through the narrow space between one side of the truck and the wall . He slipped into the space between a truck and a wall wall .
 He proceeded down the ramp until he found himself in the basement garage . He proceeded to find the garage in his basement .
 He mingled with the scrum of journalists and others and melted into the crowd . The former President of the U.S. President Barack Obama is in the midst of a presidential election .
 Other men in the basement, the ones who knew him, either did not spot him or did not care . The men who knew the man were either not there or didn't care .
 This uninvited guest was just one of dozens of well-dressed men waiting for Lee Harvey Oswald . Oswald was waiting for Oswald at the time of the assassination .
 The second pair connected one of his wrists to one of Detective Leavelle’s so that the two men could not be separated, and Oswald could not run and make a break for it . Oswald was tied to the wrists of one of the detectives .
 The handcuff arrangement would also make it hard for Oswald to duck if someone took a shot at him . Oswald's handcuffs would also be hard for him to duck in the open .
 Pettit's gullible comments echoed the statements that the naive reporters who had covered JFK’s arrival in Dallas had made about security . Pettit: “I’m not sure what security is going to be,” he said .
 JIM LEAVELLE and his prisoner stepped into the elevator and rode it down to the garage level . The prisoner was taken into custody .
 Oswald emerged with the trademark smirk on his face, and his body pinned between Leavelle and another detective . When Oswald emerged, excited reporters and photographers pressed forward .
 The man in the dark suit and hat who had melted into the crowd emerged from it and took a lunging step toward Oswald . Pappas: The man who had walked down the driveway was Oswald's target . Oswald was shot by Oswald in November 1963 .
 The detective and his prisoner continued to look straight ahead, oblivious to the danger . The detective continued to stare straight ahead .
 No one stood between the president’s assassin and the man in the dark suit . The president's assassin was killed by the assassin .
 Oswald would be close enough to Oswald to touch him, Oswald says . Oswald would touch Oswald in another moment . Oswald was killed by a bomb blast at the White House in Washington, DC .
 Witness thought an outraged cop or reporter was going to punch Oswald in the face . One witness thought that was exactly what was about to happen . Witness thought Oswald would be punching Oswald .
 Oswald had no idea that he was a split second away from being assassinated . Oswald would have no idea he was about to be assassinated .
 Ruby squeezed the trigger and fired one round from his .38 caliber snub-nosed revolver . Ruby squeezed one round of the .38 calibre . Ruby fired a single shot from his snubbed .
 A second photographer, Bob Jackson, snapped his shutter a split second after the bullet’s impact . Bob Jackson snapped the photo of the moment the bullet struck .
 Ruby wanted to shoot Oswald again, but before he could get off another shot, policemen tackled him to the ground . Ruby was tackled to the floor by police officers before pulling the trigger again .
 Ike Pappas dropped to his knees so he would not be hit by more gunfire, but he kept reporting . Ike: "I'm not afraid of being hit by gunfire. I'm not scared of it. I just want to be safe"
 There’s absolute panic, absolute panic here in the basement of the Dallas police headquarters, police say . There is ‘absolute panic’ at the scene of the shooting, police chief says .
 The shooter’s tone was as amiable as if he were handing out complimentary passes to his nightclub, or delivering a bag of fresh beef sandwiches to a police station or broadcast studio, he said . The shooter's tone was like if he had been handing out freebies to cops
 Ruby’s aim was good enough to hit his target without shooting the detective . Ruby was able to shoot the detective without being shot at . Ruby hit the target with his aim .
 Leavelle reached down and unlocked the handcuffs that bound him to Oswald . Oswald was shot by the White House at the time of the assassination . Oswald had been shot in the head with a rifle .
 He unlocked the second pair around the prisoner’s wrists . Once he had freed himself, he unlocked the other pair around his wrists .
 Detective Combest bent over Oswald, pulled up the black sweater, and searched for a wound . Oswald was shot in the head with a bullet wound to the head .
 Oswald was already incoherent and appeared to be unconscious when he was shot . Oswald had been shot just seconds ago . Oswald was shot in the head .
 He had screamed in pain when the bullet struck him, and now he is moaning now . He screamed when he was struck by the bullet, and he was moaning now. He was moaning .
 This might be Oswald’s last chance to claim credit for his infamous crime . Oswald might be trying to get credit for the infamous crime.
 Lee Harvey Oswald, a lifelong loser and nobody, had finally done something worth remembering . To declare that he, Lee Harvey . Oswald, lifelong loser, had . finally done . It was finally worth remembering. To declare . that he . had finally . done something worthwhile .
 Oswald appeared to shake his head a little from side to side, but it was hard to tell if it was in response to the question . Oswald shook his head as he answered the question, but was not sure if he answered it . Oswald appeared in court for the first time since his
 For two days, he had enjoyed matching wits with Captain Fritz during their cat and mouse battle . Captain Fritz and Captain Fritz had been battling for two days during their battle .
 Oswald had been talking while in police custody . It had been almost impossible to stop Oswald from talking during his arrest . Oswald was found guilty of killing himself in November 1963 .
 Oswald might not want to confess, but it was in Oswald’s character to say something now, if only to tease Leavelle and congratulate him that Ruby had been such a good shot, or to ask who did it .
 Oswald did not speak now, it must have been because his grievous wound had silenced him . Oswald was shot in the head by the Nazis in September of the Second World War II . Oswald would have been killed if he had not spoken now .
 Police officers carried Oswald away from the excited journalists and the spot he was shot . Oswald was taken from the scene of the shooting to be taken away .
 A crowd of several hundred gathered outside Dallas County Jail . Protesters gathered outside the jail .
 Oswald was waiting for Oswald when he emerged from the Texas Theater . This crowd was bigger than the spontaneous mob that had gathered outside the theater on Friday afternoon . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 Today’s crowd wanted to jeer him, and hoped to get a glimpse of him as he drove past . The crowd hoped to see him again, but he was jeered by some .
 This was the second time in two days that a crowd had gathered on Houston Street to watch a famous man drive by . A crowd gathered to see a famous person drive by on Sunday .
 Sheriff Bill Decker got word that Oswald had been shot before his motorcade had gotten under way . Decker walked into the street and announced the news .
 Lee Harvey Oswald looked dead on arrival at Parkland Hospital . Like President Kennedy, Oswald looked like he was dead at the hospital . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 .
 Oswald exhibited a tenacity for life after suffering a catastrophic head wound to the head . Oswald was shot in the head by President Kennedy in September, but survived .
 Some of the same people who treated President Kennedy would now try to save the life of his suspected assassin . The wounded assassin was wheeled inside the hospital where some of the people treated him were trying to save him .
 Oswald was pronounced dead in this room less than fortyeight hours ago . Out of respect for President Kennedy, the staff refused to treat Oswald there . Oswald died less than 48 hours after being pronounced dead .
 It would be obscene to try to save the assassin’s life on the same table on which the president had died . The president's brains and blood stained their hospital gowns with the president's blood and blood .
 Oswald was taken to trauma room two, where doctors had saved the life of Governor John Connally . Oswald's life was saved by doctors in trauma room room two .
 Jack Ruby had gotten off only one shot, but he had inflicted a devastating wound . Ruby had shot only one bullet, but it was a fatal wound .
 The bullet passed sideways through Oswald’s entire torso, wreaking havoc with several internal organs . Because he shot his victim from at an angle, the bullet went sideways through his entire torso . Oswald died of his injuries .
 Whatever their personal feelings, they would do the utmost to save him . Whatever their feelings, the family would do their utmost to help him .
 Only if President Kennedy’s assassin survived his wound could Curry salvage his reputation, and that of his department . Only if he survives his wound, Curry could salvage his own reputation . Curry's department has a history of missteps .
 If Oswald died, they would be stained forever as the fools who allowed him to be killed right under their very noses . Oswald's death would stain the nation forever if he was killed .
 A dead suspect was of no use to one of the top interrogators in the history of the Dallas Police Department . The suspect was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 The press wanted him to live, and he was worth massive coverage in the weeks ahead . Swaldald was a great story, and his story was worth a lot of coverage .
 Oswald survived despite howls of delight outside the county jail, most of the American people wanted him to survive this day . Oswald was captured on September 11, 1945 . Oswald's trial in New York City was held in 1945 .
 John Kennedy's murderer has suffered a kind of Old Testament or western vigilante justice for his great crime . True, it was hard not to take some pleasure in the knowledge that John Kennedy’s murder has suffered .
 Oswald suffered a massive loss of blood after being hit by a bullet . The bullet had damaged several vital organs, and Oswald had suffered massive blood loss . Oswald had been hit by the bullet, but was able to survive .
 Lee Harvey Oswald died in the same hospital where President Kennedy had died . Oswald was found dead in the hospital where Kennedy died in 1963 . Oswald's death was the first time the president had been assassinated .
 Lee Harvey Oswald died at 2:07 p.M. just after the memorial service for President Kennedy at the Capitol had begun . Oswald died without regaining consciousness and without speaking any last words .
 Oswald was not the sort of man to clear his conscience with a death-bed confession . Even if he had remained conscious long enough to speak, Oswald would not have been able to speak . Oswald's death would have been the worst blow to the nation's reputation .
 It would have given him pleasure to carry on the game from the grave, where his silence would torment his interrogators, and force them to fit all the puzzle pieces together by themselves . He would have pleasure to keep the game alive from his grave, he says .
 NBC Television had broadcast the murder of Oswald on live television to the entire nation . NBC Television broadcast the assassination of Oswald to the nation .
 He was a middle-aged club owner and low class creature from a world of sleazy nightlife, where men drank stiff drinks and paid women to dance and strip for them onstage . The club owner was a low-class creature from the sleazy world of . nightlife .
 Like Oswald, he was another fringe character, an impulsive, moody, and violent man . He was given to wild, unstable, emotional and often dangerous mood swings . Oswald was a fringe character .
 News of Oswald's shooting competed with coverage of John F Kennedy’s memorial events . It was unwholesome, almost profane, that for the rest of the day, news of Oswald’�s shooting .
 Marina Oswald came to Parkland Hospital to view her husband’s body . Marina Oswald's husband's body was found at 2:25 pm . Oswald was a Marine Marine Corps veteran .
 Lee should be buried in Arlington National Cemetery, she said . Then she blabbered about Lee's burial in Arlington . Lee's daughter said Lee should have been buried in the national cemetery .
 Lee Harvey Oswald left behind another victim -- the city of Dallas . Oswald was killed in Dallas, Texas, in the early 1960s .
 Americans began to blame an entire city or state for the murder of President Kennedy .
 Texas crowds spat at Lyndon and Lady Bird Johnson at the Adolphus Hotel . People remembered that Texas crowds had once spat at LBJ at the hotel .
 Hecklers disrupted a speech by Kennedy’s ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson . They remembered how in October 1963, hecklers disrupted the speech by Stevenson . Stevenson was the U.S. Ambassador to the UN, who was assassinated in 1963 .
 The political situation there was too volatile, and he was not liked there, he said . He was 'not liked there. He was not like to be liked there,' he added .
 Kennedy bristled at the suggestion that any part of the U.S. was too dangerous for a president to visit . Kennedy bristles at the idea that any parts of the United States were too dangerous .
 WELCOME TO TEXAS newspaper ad and WANTED FOR TREASON handbills . Then there was a menacing WELWelcome to Texas newspaper ad . The Texas governor has been indicted for treason .
 Dallas Chief of Police Jesse Curry had to go on television to tell citizens to treat the president with respect . Curry says the president should treat him with respect, not disrespect .
 Rumors spread that in Texas classrooms, schoolchildren cheered when they heard that Kennedy had been shot . Schoolchildren cheer when they hear that Kennedy was shot, according to reports .
 Other stories claimed that adult Texans, upon hearing the news, had rejoiced in the streets . Other reports claimed that adults in Texas rejoiced after the news .
 Outside of Texas, politicians, newspaper editors, and others beat the drumbeat of collective guilt . "Outside of Texas," politicians and newspaper editors beat a collective guilt drumbeat .
 Most of Dallas had given the Kennedys a friendly reception . Of course such emotional criticism ignored the fact that most of Dallas gave the Kennedy family a friendly welcome .
 No one in that motorcade could have concluded that cheering Dallas crowds “hated” JFK and wanted him to die . No one would conclude that Dallas crowds hated JFK and want him dead .
 Two days after the assassination, Chief Justice of the United States Earl Warren spoke at a memorial service in Washington, D.C., at the memorial service . Chief Justice Warren said the climate of hate had caused the assassination .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy "has been snatched from our midst by the bullet of an assassin" Kennedy was killed by a single bullet in 1963 . Kennedy was assassinated by an assassin in 1968 .
 What moved some misguided wretch to do this horrible deed may never be known to us, but we do know that such acts are commonly stimulated by forces of hatred and malevolence, such as today .
 He was a leftist who hated the right wing, and had tried to murder an ultraconservative army general . He was also a leftist who hated right-wingers .
 Everybody knew that Warren was also talking about Dallas, the city that boasted a big billboard that read impeach earl warren . Dallas was also known for a billboard that said impeach Warren .
 Lee Harvey Oswald's murder was the murder of Oswald while in police custody that turned the nation against Dallas . Oswald was shot and killed by police officers in Dallas, Texas, in November 1963 . Oswald's death was the only reason for the nation to turn its guns on Dallas .
 The assassination of the president came like a bolt of lightning that struck without warning from bright blue sky . The assassination came without warning, President Obama's assassination was like a lightning bolt .
 On a dozen occasions, the police department had displayed their prisoner to the press in crowded, unsecured hallways . The prisoner had been displayed to a dozen times in crowded halls .
 Death threats against the prisoner came in, but security at the jail remained lax . Death threats came in . Security at the prison remained lax at the time .
 Oswald was transferred to another location in the middle of a media circus in a poorly secured basement . Oswald was moved to a new location, but the media circus was too small for him .
 Negligence and incompetence pushed the assassin offstage before he could perform his starring role . The assassin had been pushed offstage by his own incompetence .
 They wanted to hear from the witnesses and see the evidence presented in a court of law . The case was brought before a jury in a trial in New York City, New Jersey .
 Jackie Kennedy and her brotherin-law Robert entered the East Room and approached the closed, flag-draped coffin . On Sunday, November 24, at 12:34m. ET, Jackie and Robert Kennedy visited the coffin of the late president .
 At her request, the honor guard removed the American flag, and the casket was opened . The casket is opened at the request of the honor guards .
 The president’s coffin at the East Front of the United States Capitol was sealed and draped again with the national colors .
 Military pallbearers in immaculate dress uniforms lifted the casket and carried the late president through the White House and outside to a waiting artillery caisson drawn by six gray horses . The late president's casket was carried by a military pallbearer in a white dress .
 At 1:08 p.M., the cortege left the White House for memorial ceremonies at the U.S. Capitol . Then, at 1:07 p.m., the memorial ceremonies were held at the Capitol in Washington, D.C.
 Military musicians muffled by shrouds of black cloth wrapped around them, beat the mournful sound of the funeral cadence . Military musicians beat the usual crisp rat-tat-tats sound of their drums .
 Tens of thousands of people lined the route along Pennsylvania Avenue .
 Abraham Lincoln’s funeral procession to the Capitol on April 19, 1865 . Lincoln's funeral procession was just like Abraham Lincoln's 1865 funeral procession . Lincoln died in 1865 .
 The honor guard carried President Kennedy up the steps and past the very spot where he had taken the oath of office . When the procession arrived at the East Front, the honor guard took him past the spot he'd sworn in to office .
 They carried him into the rotunda and laid his coffin under the Great Dome . The coffin was laid on the very spot where Abraham Lincoln’s coffin had once rested .
 John Kennedy had begun his political career at this place, first as a congressman, then a senator . John Kennedy was a senator in the late 1960s, when he was a congressman .
 One of the speakers was Senator Mike Mansfield, one of the lions of the Senate . Senator Mansfield is a member of the state legislature .
 His eulogy, a tribute to both John and Jackie Kennedy, stunned listeners . The Kennedy tribute to the couple stunned listeners at Kennedy's funeral .
 There was a wit in a man neither young nor old, but a wit full of an old man's wisdom and of a child’s wisdom, and then, in a moment it was no more . The wit in the man's wit was neither young or old but of a
 There was a man marked with the scars of his love of country, a body active with the surge of a life far, far from spent and, in a moment, it was no more . It was a body of a man who was marked with scars of love of the country .
 There was a father with a little boy, a little girl and a joy of each in each in the other . "There was a joy in each of them," the father says .
 In a moment it was no more, she took a ring from her finger and placed it in his hands . She took the ring and gave it to him in a moment .
 There was a husband who asked much and gave much, and out of the giving and the asking wove with a woman what could not be broken in life, and in a moment it was no more .
 She took a ring from her finger and placed it in her hands, and kissed him and closed the lid of a coffin . And so she took it in his hands .
 Of all the words of tribute spoken and written about President Kennedy, she loved none more . Of all of the words spoken and . written about him, she said, "I love none more than you."
 Jackie and her daughter, Caroline, kneeled by the coffin to say good-bye . At the conclusion of the ceremony, Jackie and Caroline said good-byeses .
 President Obama has been declared dead at the age of 93 . The president's widow says she wants to pay tribute to the fallen president . President Obama was assassinated in 2008 .
 The bronze doors of the East Front were thrown open to all comers who wanted to view the coffin . All comers wanted to see the coffin were allowed to view it .
 By 8:00 P.M., two hundred thousand stood in a line that stretched all the way down Capitol Street and past Lincoln Park . Lincoln Park, where a bronze sculpture of the Great Emancipator—Abraham Lincoln—beckoned a freed slave to rise, was
 Jackie and Robert Kennedy made a surprise return visit to the rotunda . That night at 9:04m.m. Kennedy and his wife Jackie made a return visit .
 She approached the catafalque and then, in full view of everyone in the rotunda, dropped to her knees . The queen then dropped to the floor, dropping to knees .
 She did not want to get into the car waiting at the base of the East Front . She was waiting for a car waiting for her husband to drive her to the base .
 She and her brother-in-law walked along Constitution Avenue for a while, almost to the foot of Capitol Hill . Then they got in their car and returned to the White House .
 People did not notice her because they found it so improbable that she would walk in public among them . She walked in front of them because they thought it was so improbable she would do so .
 After a few people realized it was her, Jackie walked to the street, got into her car, and returned to the White House .
 A Christian shouldn't think that, but the utter senselessness—the meaninglessness—it—you know, we all of us down here know that politics is a tough game, and I don't think there is any point in being Irish if you don’t know that the
 By nine A.M. on Monday morning, 250,000 people had filed past the coffin . The line to get into the Capitol was three miles long .
 There was no more time to admit everyone else still standing in the long line. There were no more than a dozen people still waiting in the line .
 The viewing could not continue because now it was time for the president’s funeral . It was time to be time to attend the funeral of the president .
 Jacqueline Kennedy could have waited at the White House while her husband’s coffin was removed from the Capitol and brought to the mansion .
 Wherever he went, she would follow, until she would take him to the place where she could follow no more . She would follow him wherever he went until she found him .
 Jackie, escorted by the president’s two brothers, ascended the East Front steps and walked into the rotunda . Jackie was escorted by President Obama's two brothers .
 Military casket team lifted coffin from catafalque and carried it out of rotunda . Then they descended the stairs to the East Front .
 Kennedy and her husband’s brothers Robert and Edward lead the procession from the White House to St. John Paul Kennedy's funeral .
 Jacqueline Kennedy led a procession on foot to St. Paul's Cathedral . From 11:35m to 12:30m, Jacqueline led the procession to the cemetery .
 Many heads of state from around the world traveled to Washington for the event . The event was attended by dignitaries, heads of states, presidents and more .
 Mourners included French president Charles de Gaulle, British prime minister Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Irish president Eamon de Valera, and Ethiopian emperor Haile Selassie .
 The Secret Service begged Lyndon Johnson to ride in a car and not march in the procession . It was too dangerous, they warned, and they did not want to lose another president .
 More than one thousand people attended the service, a low mass conducted by the famous Catholic priest Richard Cardinal Cushing of Boston .
 The sacred music, religious incantations, and the somber setting proved too much for Jackie . Jackie says she was overwhelmed by the music and the setting .
 "May the angels, dear Jack . . . May the angels," she said . She began to sob again and shake again .
 Her daughter, Caroline, took her hand and said, “You’ll be all right, Mummy.” Her daughter said: “I’m all right. You’re OK. Mummy, Caroline’s hand .
 After the service, Jacqueline Kennedy and her children watched the honor guard carry the coffin down the steps . The honor guard carried the coffin away from the cathedral .
 John Kennedy Jr. saluted his father’s coffin just as he had seen soldiers in uniform do . He saluted the coffin as he was seen in uniform by soldiers .
 The heartbreaking gesture was one of the most unforgettable images of the funeral . It was a heartbreaking gesture that became one of many unforgettable images . The funeral was held in New York City, New York .
 Jacqueline had expected to preside over a White House dinner for West German chancellor Ludwig Erhard .
 She had scheduled the event weeks ago and had mailed the invitations before the trip to Dallas . She had mailed invitations weeks ago .
 By all rights, she should be supervising last-minute preparations for a social event, not her husband’s funeral .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was one of the invited dinner guests . Secretary of defense McNamara attended the dinner with President Nixon .
 He had expected to pass through the Southwest Gate of the White House that day, not the gates of Arlington Cemetery . He said he had expected the gates to be at Arlington Cemetery, not at Arlington .
 At 1:30 p.Mo., the horse-drawn caisson bearing President Kennedy departed St. Louis, Missouri . The president's funeral was the last of the Kennedy era .
 It sounded as though the instrument itself were weeping, which heightened the drama of the scene . The instrument itself was weeping as it sounded as if it were weeping .
 Riflemen fired three volleys overhead, an eerie echo of the three shots fired in Dallas . Riflemen fire volleys over Dallas, Texas, as they try to find out what happened .
 Soldiers removed the flag from the coffin, folded it into a triangle, and presented it to Jackie . The flag was removed from Jackie's coffin and the triangle was presented to her by soldiers .
 Jacqueline Kennedy used a taper to light an “eternal flame” beside the grave . At 3:13 p.M. at 3:14 p.m. at the time, she lit an ‘eternal light’ beside her grave .
 She said she wanted to light a flame at the climax of the service in Arlington that would burn forever in memory of her husband . The service was held in Arlington, Virginia .
 She recalled the day when she and the president had toured Gettysburg . She said she and President Obama toured the Civil War battlefield .
 The Eternal Light Peace Memorial was dedicated by President Roosevelt in 1938 . A gas-powered fire that burned day and night, around the clock, lit the top of the monument .
 At Arlington, army engineers had one built at ground level next to President Kennedy’s grave site in less than twenty-four hours . It was ready in time for Jackie to light it on Monday afternoon .
 Jacqueline Kennedy watched as the flag from her husband’s coffin was folded . The flag was folded from the coffin of her husband .
 When the service was over, she got into her limousine to return to the White House to greet the guests .
 After leaving Arlington, her car pulled away from the rest of the motorcade . The motorcade left Arlington and left Arlington, Texas .
 Jackie looked through the window and gazed up at the sculpture of Father Abraham, who had perished from an assassin’s bullet ninety-eight years earlier . The Lincoln Memorial .
 She stood in a receiving line and greeted guests from around the world . Then she returned to the White House, where she stood in line .
 Tippit was buried with full honors; more than one thousand people attended the service . The funeral was attended by more than 1,000 people .
 Lee Harvey Oswald was buried in Texas in a cheap, cloth-covered pine casket . Oswald's body was buried that afternoon in Texas . Oswald had been buried in a cloth casket, a cheap casket covered in a pine cloth .
 The timing was shocking—the same day as the funerals for the two men he was accused of murdering, President Kennedy and Officer Tippit . President Kennedy's funeral was the same day that the alleged murder suspect was accused .
 At Oswald’s hurried, tenminute graveside ceremony, the more than seventy-five reporters, photographers, and law enforcement officials far outnumbered the handful of mourners .
 Aside from his family, no one who knew him wanted to be seen at his funeral . The funeral was held in New York City .
 News reporters volunteer to carry the assassin’s lonely casket to its resting place . News reporters volunteered to carry out the funeral procession .
 Only Oswald’s wife, Marina, and their two daughters, his mother, Marguerite, and his brother Robert, mourned him . Only Oswald's family came to mourn him, including his wife and two daughters .
 Life magazine published photographs of the funeral, including a large, double-page image taken at dusk that made it appear that heaven itself—with dark, gloomy, and threatening skies—had cursed Oswald in the grave . The funeral was held in New York City .
 Watchmen stood guard over the assassin’s final resting place to prevent distraught citizens from, under the cover of darkness, desecrating the grave . That night, watchmen stand guard .
 After his burial, bootleg copies of gruesome photographs of his body leaked out and were published widely . The photos were taken at the autopsy and taken at his burial site .
 In the days ahead, morbid curiosity seekers would flock to his grave, and someone stole his tombstone . The tombstone was stolen from his grave .
 Years later, in a bizarre attempt to verify that Oswald was really in the coffin, his remains were exhumed and photographed again . The corpse was photographed again in an attempt to confirm it was Oswald, an outlandish claim pressed by extremists .
 Jacqueline Kennedy hosted a little birthday party for her son at the White House at 7:00 p.m. That night she hosted a birthday party . The White House hosted the party that night .
 A memorial banner printed in Chicago within a few Mh of the assassination . We Mourn Our Loss . AGL A MAA ATTN TE .
 A 2 g Ss A 2 e 8 g g g A 4) g CO A 4 . A 4 y K g oO 4 oe er a r g Cy Op A 4. Oy Z Fd Es p | N \ N N XN \ \ “Ask
 At midnight, after everyone had gone, she returned to Arlington Cemetery to bid her husband a private farewell .
 By now the casket had been lowered into the grave and covered with a mound of earth . The casket was lowered to the ground and covered up with earth .
 The next morning Lyndon Johnson found a handwritten letter from Jacqueline Kennedy on his desk . The next day he found the letter from his wife of six months .
 She thanked him for walking behind President Kennedy's coffin in the previous day’s procession from the White House to St. Paul's .
 Of course Bobby hated him, while JFK respected him, the former rivals from Harvard and the Texas Hill Country were always men from different worlds . JFK and Bobby Kennedy were both men from a different worlds.
 Eternal 4 Fiame nf light te remember remember The electric Eternal Flame night-light . Eternal Flame is a light that can be used in the morning .
 Jacqueline Kennedy knew how her husband’s defeat of Johnson in the 1960 Democratic presidential nomination must have been a humbling experience for him .
 LBJ had to live with the door prize of the vice presidency . It had not been easy for LBJ to live . LBJ: "It's not easy for him"
 Jackie planned to move out of the White House in ten days, on December 6 . She planned to leave on December 5 .
 She confided to Johnson that after she had gotten home yesterday from the funeral, she went in search of memories . Johnson: "After she got home yesterday, and after she . had greeted the last guest, she . greeted her last guest"
 She walked through the Treaty Room, the library and more, and finally the Oval Office in which her husband had risen from his chair for the flight to Texas just four days earlier . The Oval Office is where she met her husband .
 Haha TS Tay HIS SECRET SASL HIS VICIOUS Hit COLLECTOR'S COPY . Even Lee Harvey Oswald got his own magazine. Haha. Even Lee . Harvey Harvey Oswald .
 Even in her profound sorrow, Jackie could not suppress one of the traits essential to her nature— her love of design and aesthetics . Even in the profound sorrow of her loss, Jackie was committed to her work, she said .
 Jackie had run a little White House school for a small group of children, including her own . Jackie ran the school for her own children . The school was run by Jackie in the White House .
 Johnson told her that it must go on, assuring her it was not an imposition . Johnson said that it would not be an imposition and that it will continue .
 As after the murder of Abraham Lincoln ninety-eight years earlier, the American people coveted souvenirs and relics of the assassination . Lincoln's assassination was the first assassination in the U.S. since his assassination .
 All over the country, people saved newspapers from November 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 . In no city was any newspaper more desirable than the first edition that announced the assassination .
 Entrepreneurs manufactured celluloid, pin-back memorial buttons by the millions . JFK banners that were printed on black felt or on white fabric printed on felt or fabric .
 Three-dimensional Dealey Plaza desk ornament created with ballpoint pen and paper-clip tray . The ornament was created by an opportunist in Dallas .
 Publishers flooded newsstands with dozens of different John Kennedy commemorative magazines .
 Others have issued dozens of memorial albums of JFK’s speeches or of the radio and television coverage of the assassination . Others have also issued memorial albums .
 Two days after the funeral, on November 27, 1963, President Lyndon Johnson addressed a joint session of Congress . The funeral was held in New York City .
 The greatest leader of our time has been struck down by the foulest deed of our times, writes David Frum . He writes: 'The greatest leader in our time was struck down'
 Today John Kennedy lives on in the immortal words and works that he left behind . John Kennedy's legacy will live on in his immortal words .
 I profoundly hope that the tragedy and torment of these terrible days will bind us together in new fellowship, making us one people in our hour of sorrow .
 Let us here highly resolve that John Fitzgerald Kennedy did not live—or die—in vain . So let us here . resolve that he did not die in vain. Let us . resolve to honor Kennedy .
 Johnson wanted the commission to finish its work well before November 1964, so that no uncertainties plagued him during the presidential election . Johnson wanted to finish the commission's work before the election so no uncertainty plagued him .
 If Lyndon Johnson wanted to discover the truth about John Kennedy’s death, Jacqueline Kennedy wanted to preserve her version of the truth . Kennedy: "If you want to know what happened to John Kennedy, it's time for you to find out"
 Jackie unveiled an enduring myth that forever defined her husband’s presidency . LBJ created the Warren Commission on the same day that LBJ . The Warren Commission was created .
 The November 29 Washington Star newspaper carried an article by Jack and Jackie’s old friend Charlie Bartlett . Bartlett wrote about the couple's relationship in a letter to the Washington Star .
 Up until then, most journalists had focused on the late president in their editorial tributes . Up until now, most of the tributes had been focused on him .
 The press had heaped praise on Jacqueline Kennedy for her brave and dignified behavior during the four days from November 22 to 25 .
 Jacqueline Kennedy had a plan to transform her husband into a legend . That night, during a drenching New England storm, just a week after her husband was slain in her arms, she planned to make him a hero .
 White and Kennedy had gotten to know each other, and John Kennedy had admired him . The president had admired White, and the president admired him, White says .
 When White called the Secret Service he was, he wrote, “curtly informed that Mrs. White was not allowed to call . The Secret Service was called to the White House to investigate the incident .
 Kennedy was no longer the President’s wife, and she could give them no orders for cars . Kennedy was not president's wife, but she could no longer give them orders .
 White hired a car and driver and headed north into the New England storm . White says the storm is the only thing to worry about is the weather .
 He called his editors at Life to tell them about his exclusive scoop, but they told him the next issue was about to go to press . The next issue of Life magazine was due to publish in the fall .
 They warned him it would cost $30,000 an hour to hold the presses open for his story . The press was warned it would be costly to have the presses held open for him .
 This meant that the most important photojournalism magazine in America would be standing still and delaying the printing of its next issue for a story that had not yet been written and would be based on an interview that hadn't yet even been conducted . The next issue of the magazine's next issue
 Life was willing to do almost anything to get an exclusive interview with Jacqueline Kennedy . Life wanted to interview the First Lady, but Life would be willing to go almost anything .
 Jackie instructed her houseguests, who included Dave Powers, Franklin D Roosevelt Jr., and Chuck Spalding, that she wanted to speak with him alone . She instructed them to speak to him alone.
 Jackie complained that “bitter people” were already writing stories, attempting to measure her husband with a laundry list of his achievements and failures . Jackie complained about the stories, saying that ‘bitter' people are already writing .
 She delivered a stream-of-conscious narrative about Dallas, the blood, the head wound, the wedding ring, the hospital, and how she kissed him good-bye . White asked her to explain, and then, for the next three and a half hours, she delivered a j
 She was talking about the popular Broadway musical fantasy about King Arthur’s court .
 President Kennedy was dead and buried in his grave, and she wanted to step out of the spotlight . She told a journalist she wanted the president to step down from the spotlight. She said she wanted a little more of a private life .
 Around midnight White went upstairs to write the story, "Life needed it tonight, before he left Jackie," he said .
 He came down around 2:00m. and tried to dictate the story over a wall-hung telephone in her kitchen . He came to her home in the early hours of Saturday morning .
 One of his editors caught the stress in his voice and suspected Jackie . Jackie was the subject of an investigation into his behavior .
 It was Jacqueline Kennedy’s tour de force, her finest hour, of press manipulation . It was more than five hours of her press manipulation, her best hour .
 She had summoned an influential, Pulitzer Prize-winning author to do her bidding . Like so many men she had mesmerized before, he did it .
 White violated ethics by allowing the subject of a story to read it in advance and edit it . White violated all standards of journalism ethics by letting the subject read the story .
 He was serving as the awestruck courtier of a bereaved widow . But he was not acting as a journalist that night .
 Camelot and its brief shining moment became one of the most celebrated and enduring myths in American politics .
 To Jackie, the assassination symbolized an end of days, not just for her husband, but also for the nation . Jackie's husband was assassinated in 1968 . Jackie: "To Jackie, it was a symbol of an end to days"
 Other journalists placed themselves in the service of the newborn Kennedy legend .
 History will best judge John Kennedy in calmer days when time has made the tragic and grotesque at least bearable . History will judge him best when it comes to a calmer, calmer day .
 History will judge him well for his wisdom and compassion and grace, says President Obama . "Surely history will remember him well," he says .
 Their life together began as it ended -- in a hospital . Through sickness and loneliness there grew the special love that lights up the soul of the lover and the loved alike .
 John Kennedy is dead, and for that we are a lesser people in a lesser land . John Kennedy's death is not a tragedy, but it's a tragedy for the nation, says CNN's John Sutter .
 That month, Look, the Saturday Evening Post, and the Saturday Review all published worshipful JFK tributes .
 Today it is difficult to fathom or exaggerate the cultural influence these now vanished, oversize-format, photo-news magazines once had . The magazine's cultural influence has never been underestimated .
 Life magazine became more synonymous with the ‘Four Days’ the nation had suffered than Life magazine . Life magazine was one of the most influential publications in the country's history .
 CBS presented to its employees as a memento a nineteen-page pamphlet documenting their hard work over the past three weeks . CBS presented the pamphlet to employees December 12 .
 The pamphlet was illustrated with forty-eight small television screens depicting iconic images from the time of the assassination to the president’s funeral .
 From Dallas to Arlington, broadcast to the nation on the night of Monday, November 25 . The Dallas-Fort Worth Marathon will take place in Dallas, Texas, on November 26 .
 It was time, thought CBS president Frank Stanton, for some tasteful selfcongratulation . Stanton: "It's time for tastefully self congratulating"
 There followed, for the next four days, what was certainly the longest uninterrupted story in the history of television and possibly all broadcasting . The story was perhaps the longest in television history .
 Jacqueline Kennedy decided she did not want to remain living in the White House for long . Jacqueline had decided she wanted to be president .
 Jackie Lincoln was determined to avoid similar criticism about Mary Lincoln’s long-term occupancy of the Executive Mansion .
 Jacqueline Kennedy wanted to be out of the mansion within two weeks of the assassination . Despite President Johnson’s gracious invitation to remain as long as she wished, she wanted to leave .
 She and the president had sold the house at 3307 N Street NW after the election . She longed to return to her former neighborhood in Georgetown, Georgetown .
 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara had offered to get it for her . On the night of November 22, Defense Secretary McNamara offered to help get it .
 W. Averell Harriman offered her the use of his elegant residence at 3038 N Street NW, a few blocks from the old Kennedy place . W.Averell . Harrimans had held several posts in the Kennedy administration .
 Before leaving the White House, there were several things she wanted to do . But before she left, she had a list of things to do with her presidency .
 Jackie attended a Department of the Treasury ceremony honoring Secret Service agent Clint Hill with the Exceptional Service Award for his bravery on November 22 . Jackie attended the ceremony on December 3 .
 Her memories were fresh and painful, and it was difficult to relive that day, but she had grown close to Hill . She wanted to show by her presence that she did not blame her trusted guardian for her husband’s assassination .
 She also informed the Secret Service that she wanted Hill to stay on as her personal agent . She also told them she wants Hill to remain as her agent . Hill has been a Secret Service agent since 1996 .
 She also handwrote thank-you notes to members of the White House staff .
 Jackie Kennedy’s self-imposed two-week deadline for leaving the White House coincided with the Presidential Medal of Freedom ceremony . The ceremony had been scheduled long before the assassination .
 The printed program included some of the words President Kennedy had intended to say that day . President Kennedy's words were printed in the program .
 "Over the past two weeks, our Nation has known moments of the utmost sorrow, of anguish and shame," says President Obama .
 In the shattering sequence of events that began 14 days ago, we encountered in its full horror man’s capacity for hatred and destruction . The film is based on the book, "The Death of the Prophet Muhammad"
 I want to thank you for reminding us that whatever evil moments may pass by, we are and we shall continue to be a people touched with greatness called to high destiny to serve great purposes .
 John Fitzgerald Kennedy, 35th President of the United States, was a soldier, scholar, statesman, defender of freedom, pioneer for peace, author of hope . He led the land he loved toward new frontiers of opportunity for all men and peace .
 Jackie watched the ceremony from a spot where she was hidden from view . No one attending the event knew it, but Jackie had watched it from a hidden spot .
 It was a bittersweet honor to watch another president award the medals her husband had looked forward to presenting . The medals were presented by another president, she said .
 Jackie left a note and flowers for the new First Lady, Lady Bird Johnson, on the day she left the White House .
 John sat on his desk while Jackie, putting on a brave front for the camera, smiled . John and Jackie sat on their desks while Jackie sat in the chair .
 Jacqueline Kennedy left the White House, returning to her beloved Georgetown, where her life with Jack had begun . Then she returned to Georgetown, which she had lived with Jack .
 On December 11, 1963, the McNamaras sent over a gift to Jackie at the Harriman house . The gift was a gift that Jackie received from her family .
 Jackie confided that she could not even bear to display photographs of her husband . She confided she couldn't bear to show photographs of him . Jackie said she was devastated by her husband's death .
 The picture was on the floor, “propped up against the wall at the little study outside my bedroom.” It was “a little study’s not far from my bedroom,” she says .
 Jackie suggested that the McNamaras take back the painting and donate it to the Kennedy Library several years down the road . Jackie suggested the painting be donated to the library after the institution was built .
 "Throughout his life, he had malice toward none; he had charity for all," says the author . "He had charity toward none," he says .
 We buried Abraham Lincoln and John Kennedy, but we did not bury their dreams or visions . We buried Lincoln and JFK, but not their dreams, their visions. We buried them, we buried their dreams and visions, we said .
 Lincoln and Kennedy moved toward those nobler dreams and visions where the needs of the people dwell . They are our dreams and our visions today, for President Lincoln and John Kennedy . The Lincoln vision is our vision today, and today's vision is of Lincoln .
 Let there be for all people in need the light of an era of new hope and a time of new resolve . On this eve of Christmas, in this time of grief and unity, of sadness and continuity, let there be .
 She should have been supervising the decoration of the White House tree and the historic rooms and hosting festive receptions .
 After only two Christmases there, she was living in a strange and empty house . She had only been there for the past two Christmas .
 She said she had not forgotten the handful of people who had meant the most to her and the president . But she said she hadn't forgotten the people who she had meant to her .
 So she selected special gifts—books, photos, personal mementos—for her intimates .
 To the secretary of defense, she gave a specially bound copy of Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the U.S. from George Washington 1789 to John F Kennedy 1961 .
 Jackie inscribed it “To Robert McNamara—The President was going to give you this for Christmas—Please accept it now from me—With my devotion always for all you did for Jack”
 She also gave him a framed set of three black-and-white photographs of Powers playing with John Jr. Powers Jr. She gave him three black and white photographs .
 She inscribed the mat “For Dave Powers—Who gave the president so many of his happiest hours—and who will now do the same for his son, John Jr.” The mat was dedicated to the late president .
 Jacqueline Kennedy went to the Department of Justice's headquarters in January 1964 . The headquarters occupied an entire city block of south side of Pennsylvania Avenue between Ninth and Tenth streets .
 She rode an elevator to the fifth floor and stepped into a hallway decorated with vintage WPA-style hand-painted murals depicting scenes from 1930s America . The hallway is decorated with huge, vintage hand painted murals .
 She proceeded to a doorway marked by a wood sign painted with gold letters . The sign was painted in gold letters, and she proceeded to walk through a doorway .
 It was the office of the attorney general, Robert Kennedy, her brother-in-law Robert Kennedy . The office of attorney general was her sister's office . She was killed in her husband's assassination .
 She took her seat in a leather club chair placed near a fireplace hearth . She sat in the chair near the hearth in the fireplace .
 The homey setting and crackling fire made it look as though she was anywhere but in a government office building . The fire was set in front of a crackling fireplace and a cozy fireplace .
 The crew switched on the lights and aimed the cameras at Jackie, and she began to speak . The crew turned on the cameras and aimed them at Jackie .
 It was for a short film, less than three minutes long, to thank the American people for their condolences and expressions of love for her husband .
 She thanked them for their letters, promised they would be archived at the Kennedy Library, and said all the usual niceties one might expect a widow .
 She caught viewers off guard with an emotional remark that revealed how much she missed him . Then she made an emotional comment that revealed she was missing him .
 The knowledge of the affection in which my husband was held by all of you has sustained me, and the warmth of these tributes is something I shall never forget, says his wife . She says she will never forget the warm tributes .
 "Each and every message is to be treasured, not only for my children, but so that future generations will know how much our country and people in other nations thought of him," she said .
 Your letters will be placed with his papers in the library to be erected in his memory along the Charles River, in Boston Massachusetts .
 I hope that in years to come many of you and your children will be able to visit the Kennedy Library . The library will be open to the public for the first time .
 President Kennedy's memorial will be a living center of study of the times in which he lived . It will be, we hope, not only a memorial to President Kennedy but a center for young people and scholars .
 The president's family thanks the letters for their comfort . The letters have brought comfort to the president's children and his family .
 Jackie had decided to make Georgetown her permanent home, and in February 1964 she bought a house of her own at 3017 N Street NW .
 On the day she had moved into the Harriman house, photographers and filmmakers were waiting outside to snap pictures of her .
 A sad image from that day shows her in a black mourning dress, her head held high as she tried to put on a brave smile . She led her children into their new home and their new lives .
 In the days ahead, people stopped on the sidewalk and gaped, hoping to peek through the windows or, better yet, to glimpse Jackie entering or leaving the premises . People stopped to gape as Jackie entered or left the premises.
 Photographers staked out the house day and night, hoping to take a salable photograph of the widow and her children . Photographers were hoping to get a picture of the family .
 Some photographers even snapped images of other photographers photographing the house .
 Photojournalists stalked her at her home, followed her wherever she went . Photojournalist followed her everywhere she went, including her home .
 Jackie could not leave her home without taking the risk that intrusive strangers might accost her in the street . Jackie says she was afraid to leave her house without risking being accosted .
 It happened all over again when she moved from the Harriman place to her new house across the street . It happened again as she moved to a new home .
 Jackie helped organize a traveling exhibition of JFK’s favorite mementos . Jackie organized the exhibition to raise support for the future Kennedy Library .
 Once again, Life magazine put her picture on the cover and published her essay about the exhibition . Life magazine did so many times when the Kennedys were in the White House, including in the 1960s .
 In March 1964, National Geographic published a special issue devoted to the assassination . National Geographic later published an issue dedicated to JFK .
 The magazine was a monthly with a long lead time, so it came out much later than the weekly Life, Look, and the Saturday Evening Post . It came out in December 1963 and January 1964 .
 The Geographic’s president and editor, Melville Bell Grosvenor, wrote, “His life was such—the radiance he shed—that if we live to be a hundred, we will remember how he graced this earth .”
 Only the future can assign to John Fitzgerald Kennedy his true place in history, only the future will assign him to it .
 In 1964, Jacqueline Kennedy announced that she was selling her Georgetown house .
 Her decision shocked the political and social elites of the nation’s capital . Her decision to step down from the White House has shocked many of Washington's political elites .
 Jackie Kennedy had transformed Jackie Kennedy into a national obsession . The assassination had transformed the assassination into an obsession with her .
 She had enjoyed great popularity as First Lady, but this was something more . Yes, she had enjoyed a great popularity but this is something more than that . She had been a great success in the United States, but her popularity has waned .
 She had hoped that one day soon she could stroll the streets of Georgetown, visiting her favorite bookshops, florists, antique shops, and grocery stores as she did .
 The harassment got worse every month, until she could no longer endure it . She was forced to take her own life in a bid to escape the harassment .
 Jacqueline Kennedy abandoned the capital less than a year after the assassination . She was in an effort to reclaim her private life .
 She said good-bye to her Washington days and moved to Manhattan, where she had spent many happy times before her marriage . She moved to New York where she spent most happy times .
 She promised herself to honor the vow she had made when she had moved out of the White House . She would never set foot there again .
 One relentless photographer specialized in stalking her and made a career out of taking pictures of her unguarded moments .
 Jackie Kennedy remained an unwilling star in the spotlight on the American stage . For the rest of her life, she remained an iconic figure . Jackie Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 Between November 22, 1963, and January 20, 1965, America did not have a vice president . America had no vice president between 1963 and 1965 .
 The Constitution made no provision to create a new one when Lyndon Johnson was elevated to the presidency . The Constitution did not make a provision for a new president when he became president .
 Johnson was uncontested as the Democratic nominee for president in 1964 . Speculation over whom Johnson might choose as his running mate became one of the most popular guessing games in political circles .
 He was expected to make the announcement at the Democratic convention in late August 1964 . The announcement is expected to be made at the party's convention .
 He viewed it as a springboard that might launch him to the presidency one day, possibly in 1968 or 1972 . He said he hoped to be a presidential candidate in either way .
 Bobby campaigned for it and, in a face-to-face meeting with Johnson, had almost begged for it . Bobby, in fact, almost begged Johnson for it. Bobby campaigned .
 His loathing for LBJ had always been obvious, and he had never made much effort to hide it . He had never tried to hide his loathing of LBJ .
 John Kennedy had no intention of making John Kennedy’s little brother his vice president . John Kennedy's little brother was not going to be a vice president, he said .
 Johnson worried that Jackie might be promoting Bobby for the spot behind the scenes . But Johnson worried he might have been promoting Bobby behind scenes .
 The president considered him one of his most trusted advisers, and he sent him on a secret mission . President Obama sent him out on a mission to find out what he was doing .
 For Johnson, Jacqueline Kennedy had always been the elusive and mysterious object of his desire . Johnson had always wanted to marry Jacqueline, but she was always elusive .
 He craved her support, her friendship, her presence, and her essence . Not sexually, of course, but in the sense that he craved . He craves her support .
 LBJ's frequent calls to her after the assassination, preserved when LBJ recorded them, document his pursuit . LBJ records her calls to him after her assassination .
 Jackie had proven resistant to his charms since the assassination of JFK . But ever since his assassination, Jackie proved resistant to him .
 She had politely declined his various invitations to return to the White House . She had declined to return .
 Jackie well knew that the most effective way to resist Johnson was from a safe distance, before his cajoling voice or physical presence could work their magic . Jackie knew how to resist him from a distance .
 Jackie had always been flattered and attracted by the attentions of older, powerful men . Jackie was always attracted to older men .
 In his first year in office, Johnson suffered in John Kennedy’s shadow . The president suffered in the shadow of JFK .
 He was haunted by the ghosts of Camelot in exile, personified by Robert Kennedy . Now he is haunted by a ghost of the former Camelot .
 President Johnson said he would never allow Bobby to be his running mate in 1964 . Bobby would not be allowed to be a running mate for the president .
 The president had been told by one or more individuals that Jackie had repeatedly stated to Bobby he must run for the Vice Presidency . Jackie insisted that Bobby should run for Vice President, rather than any desire, that was moving him .
 There was no bitterness toward the president, and she not only was not pressuring Bobby to move toward the vice presidency . But she repeatedly questioned whether it would be wise for him to accept the nomination if it were offered .
 Delegates treated to a worshipful documentary about President Kennedy . Delegates were treated to the documentary about the president .
 When Bobby Kennedy appeared at the podium, he received a thunderous, twenty-minute-long standing ovation . Bobby Kennedy received a 20-minute, 20-minutes-long ovation at the Kennedy Center .
 When he shall die Take him and cut him out in little stars And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night, And pay no worship to the garish sun .
 It was his announcement that from this moment on, he was the leader of a Kennedy party—or royal court—in exile . "It was his decision to declare himself a leader of the Kennedy party, or royal court, in exile"
 On September 24, 1964, the Warren Commission completed the report of its investigation . Ten months after the assassination, the report was released . The Warren Commission released the report in September 1964 .
 Almost three hundred thousand words long, it was accompanied by twenty-six volumes containing seventeen thousand pages of testimony, photographs, and exhibits . The book is accompanied by more than 20 volumes of testimony and exhibits, including photographs, photographs and exhibits.
 Lee Harvey Oswald had assassinated John F Kennedy, that two of the three shots he fired had struck the president, that the assassin had acted alone, and that there was no evidence that he was part of a conspiracy . Oswald was found to have acted alone .
 That fall, on November 3, 1964, President Lyndon Johnson got his mandate . President Johnson was elected to office in November 1964 .
 His victory was total, and he had done it without Bobby Kennedy, whom he had left behind in his wake, rejected and humiliated . "His victory was complete, and it was total," he said. "It was his victory and he did it with Bobby Kennedy."
 A few weeks later, the press inundated the American people with its coverage of the first anniversary of the assassination . The press flooded the U.S. with coverage of that anniversary .
 Life magazine has already given Jackie Kennedy what she wanted last year . Life magazine had already given her the legend of Camelot last year.
 This year she cooperated with rival Look magazine for a special feature and interview . This year's Look magazine featured her in a special interview .
 They could not love a new president who they believed was their inferior in culture and style . They believed that he was inferior to them in culture, style .
 Chief Justice Earl Warren and members of his commission present their report to President Johnson, September 1964 . Warren's report was presented to the President of the United States .
 Kennedy mythologized his intangible star quality, a style, an attitude, a mood, over the details . Journalists emphasized his intangible quality over details .
 In their swooning eulogies, none included something so practical and unromantic as a list of his failures and accomplishments . The list includes his failures, accomplishments and accomplishments, as well as his accomplishments .
 King told his wife, Coretta, that one day this would happen to him . King had attended President Kennedy’s funeral . King told Coretta he would be a victim of this .
 Jacqueline Kennedy attended his funeral and comforted his widow . Now, five years later, she has comforted her husband's widow .
 His massive escalation of the war in Vietnam turned much of America against him . The Vietnam War was the Vietnam War's biggest escalation of its own .
 Senator Eugene McCarthy challenged LBJ for the nomination . Robert Kennedy joined the race when LBJ was vulnerable .
 In March 1968, Johnson surprised the nation by announcing that he would not seek reelection . Johnson announced in March 1968 that he wouldn't seek reelection in the White House .
 Robert Kennedy rejoiced that Johnson had reinvigorated his own campaign for the Democratic nomination . Robert Kennedy believed that his campaign had perhaps handed him the presidency . Johnson's victory in 1964 could have handed Kennedy the presidency, Kennedy said .
 Robert Kennedy’s days ended in the pantry of the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles the night he won the California primary . In June, Robert Kennedy died in a pantry .
 His murder by an assassin’s pistol shots brought back all the old feelings . His murder was brought back to the memories of his life in prison .
 Since her husband’s assassination, Bobby had been her closest friend and adviser . Bobby was Bobby's close ally and adviser to her husband's assassination . Bobby's death was the assassination of President Kennedy Kennedy .
 Five years after she had lost Jack, Bobby had also been taken from her . Now, five years after losing Jack, she had also lost Bobby .
 Jackie was worried that Harvard would have too much control over the institution . Jackie worried about Harvard's control of the institution, which she feared would be too much .
 Her choice of husband, the older, dodgy Greek shipping millionaire Aristotle Onassis, horrified many of her friends and shocked the U.S. people . Her choice to marry Onassis horrified many, and shocked many, friends and Americans alike .
 To her fans, it was a desecration of JFK’s memory—the death of Camelot . To her . fans, the . fans of the singer's death of JFK's memory . To them, the film was the death of the Camelot.
 Once upon a time she had been one of them, the ‘Inquiring Camera Girl” from the Washington Star newspaper . She was one of the "Camera Girl’s" camera girls .
 Once, she had enticed some of the best photographers in America . Lowe, Avedon, Shaw, and others employed their art in her service .
 She manipulated the most prestigious photojournalism magazines in the country to present her and Jack in the best possible light . She manipulated them to present them in the most flattering possible light possible .
 She gave no interviews about the assassination, appeared in no television specials, and refused to commemorate the event . She refused to celebrate the assassination .
 Every five years, when the national media marked the anniversary of her husband’s death, she remained in seclusion . She maintained a sphinx-like silence .
 Despite her talent as a writer, she wrote no books or memoirs . Despite her substantial talent, she did not write a book or memoir .
 She survived the president by nearly thirty-one years . She died in May 1994 at the age of only sixty-four .
 In November 1963, she lit the eternal flame she lit in November 1963 . In Arlington National Cemetery, she lies buried beside her husband .
 The building was fortunate to survive the aftermath of the assassination of President Kennedy . The building survived the Kennedy assassination .
 To them, the building was an ugly landmark of the day that Dallas could never forget, one that they feared would scar the city’s reputation forever . They feared it would scar Dallas's reputation forever, one of the buildings .
 Once a controversial and unwelcome reminder of Dallas's worst day, today the museum is an important part of the city’s cultural landscape . Today millions of visitors have visited the museum .
 "It is not a shrine to an assassin and does not sensationalize the crime," says CNN.com's John Sutter . "It does not do anything sensationalistic," he says .
 The Dallas museum is a responsible museum that frames the events in Dallas within the broader context of President Kennedy’s life story, American politics, and the history of 1960s America . The museum is dedicated to Kennedy's life story and American politics .
 What a mistake it would have been, fifty years ago, in the heat of passion, to have torn the building down. What would be a mistake? The building was built in the 1960s and 1970s in the heart of passion .
 You can retrace Oswald's footsteps to the wall of windows facing Elm Street . As Oswald did, you can take an elevator to the sixth floor, and there you can walk to the window .
 President Obama's office is no longer open to the window from which he shot the president . But you can no longer gaze out the window of the window where he shot him .
 A Plexiglas barrier now surrounds Oswald’s corner window to protect his nest .
 Oswald was killed on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas, Texas . He was killed by a single bullet fired from the Pentagon on September 4, 1963 .
 How close President Kennedy must have appeared to him in the eyepiece of the rifle’s scope . How close he must have been to the president .
 In person, all of Dealey Plaza is smaller than it appears to be in photographs . Indeed, in person, it's smaller than the photos show .
 Tippit was captured at the Texas Theatre in Texas . He was captured in the early hours of the day .
 From Elm Street, tourists gaze up at the sixth-floor window, calculating the trajectory of the shots . The shots were fired from the sixth floor of Elm Street . From Elm St.
 The conspiracy-minded lurk behind the fence on the Grassy Knoll, speculating about a second gunman . The president's limousine is believed to have been hit by a gunman on the ground .
 Abraham Zapruder was killed in the assassination of Abraham Lincoln in 1945 . Zapruders pan with their own cameras from left to right while they replay the famous assassination home movie in their heads .
 President Kennedy was shot in the head in Dallas, Texas, in 1963 . He was killed by a single bullet bullet at the spot where he was killed .
 Oswald's coworkers approach the sniper's nest, listening for the echo of the three rifle shots and the hollow ping of three empty cartridge cases bouncing on the wood floor . Several of Oswald’s coworkers heard the sounds heard by several of his coworkers .
 Once a year, on November 22 at 12:30 PM., on the date and time of the anniversary, Dealey Plaza resembles a flea market or a street bazaar . The event takes place on the anniversary of the Dallas massacre .
 Vendors push trinkets and souvenirs, including bootleg autopsy photographs of John F Kennedy’s corpse .
 Authors peddling conspiracy theories hawk books and magazines to passersby . Authors peddle conspiracy theories to people around the world .
 Assassination buffs make annual pilgrimages to attend conspiracy-oriented conferences . Conspiracy-obsessed conspiracy theorists try to find out what the truth is .
 Dealey Plaza is the liveliest assassination site in the nation . There is nothing else like it in America . There are no other sites in America like it .
 The street in front of Ford’s Theatre is deserted every April 14 at around 10:15 p.M. on the anniversary of the murder of Abraham Lincoln . In contrast, in Washington, D.C., on April 14, the street is deserted .
 Only a handful of people —no more than five or ten —come to maintain a nighttime vigil at the place where Lincoln was shot or to sit on the steps .
 One person, in homage to Walt Whitman’s poem, usually leaves a bouquet of fresh lilacs there for Father Abraham . Father Abraham's father, Abraham's grandfather, is buried in Washington, DC .
 America’s basements, attics, and closets will disgorge millions of mementoes of the Kennedy assassination . The Kennedy assassination will take place in the fall of 2013 .
 Long-hidden souvenirs overlooked for decades will be resurrected for the fiftieth anniversary . Long hidden souvenirs will be revived for the 50th anniversary .
 On November 22, 1963, the American people experienced the assassination of John F Kennedy as a shared event . The assassination of JFK was a shared experience for all Americans .
 On the same day at the same time, an entire nation read the same stories, saw the same photographs, listened to the same radio broadcasts, and watched the same images on television . An entire nation was at the very same time as the 9/11/11 attacks .
 Three national television networks immersed the American people in a shared moment of national grief . For four days straight, the three national TV networks—CBS, NBC, and ABC— immersed themselves in the national moment of grief .
 For the first time in U.S. history, the medium of television unified a nation through its coverage of a historic event . The first time a nation united a nation was united through television coverage of the event .
 The great weekly picture magazines, Life and Look, published photos and stories seen by tens of millions of people . Similarly, the great weekly pictures magazines, such as Life and Life, published pictures and stories .
 The nation's newspapers, some printing several editions per day, published several hundred million copies . The nation’s newspapers, including newspapers, printed several editions a day .
 Once the story was over, people did not throw away their old newspapers, magazines, and commemorative publications . People still do not throw them away after the war .
 They preserved them as iconic family heirlooms, as time capsules for future generations . Instead of preserving them, they preserved the items as time capsule .
 President Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas, Texas . The Dallas Morning Herald re-imagined the events of that day in 1963 . This is the first time we have been able to read the original editions of this week's coverage of the Kennedy assassination .
 Other relics of the Kennedy assassination are unlikely to see the light of day for the fiftieth anniversary . The Kennedy assassination will be 50th anniversary of the assassination .
 The principal relics of the Kennedy assassination have been hidden from the American people by the National Archives for fifty years . Unlike the major relics of Lincoln assassination, the National Park Service displays them in its museum at Ford’s Theatre .
 The museum also displays Lincoln’s coat and bloodstained pillows from the Petersen House . Lincoln's coat and pillows are also displayed at the museum .
 The United States Army Medical Museum displays the bullet that killed Lincoln, medical instruments used on the president . Lincoln's bloodstained shirt cuffs are worn by one of the doctors who treated him .
 The National Archives has, in contrast, thrown a veil of secrecy over the artifacts of the Kennedy assassination . The National Archive has, by contrast, has kept the artifacts secret .
 The evidence of the assassination remains buried in the vaults of the Archives in an annex building in suburban Maryland . The evidence is buried in a vault in the Archives' archives .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s rifle, his pistol, his letters and writings, and his clothing, including the bullet-damaged sweater he wore when Jack Ruby shot him . The other Warren Commission exhibits are stored there too, including his rifle .
 Jackie Kennedy's pink suit is perhaps the most iconic symbol of the assassination . Jackie Kennedy’s pink suit and other clothing and accessories are also hidden away in the Archives .
 Archives seeks to suppress these from public view for another century . Archives seek to suppress public view of these images . Archives sought to suppress them for another 100 years . Archives: The Archives wants them suppressed .
 For the next three decades, Jacqueline Kennedy never sought to regain possession of the clothes . The clothes were donated to the Archives in the 1960s . They were never recovered .
 In 2003, the Archivist of the United States yielded to Caroline Kennedy’s claim of ownership, and executed an agreement banning all access to the material . The agreement was executed in 2003 .
 Not all of the evidence from the assassination is at the National Archives . Not all the evidence is in the National Archive's collection .
 President Kennedy’s brain is missing from the collection . President Kennedy's brain remains in the collection of the items .
 During the autopsy, doctors removed it and sealed it in a leakproof stainless-steel cylindrical container with a screw-top lid . Doctors removed it from the autopsy and placed it in the container .
 They failed to place his brain back in his head for the funeral, and so John Kennedy was buried without it . John Kennedy's brain was placed in the back of his head .
 It was placed in a secure room designated for the use of JFK’s former secretary, Evelyn Lincoln, while she organized his presidential papers . Then it was put in a . footlocker with other medical evidence and transferred to the National Archives .
 The locker, with all its contents, disappeared on some day prior to 1966 . No one knows when the locker was found .
 Robert Kennedy's brother's brain was stolen from his brother's locker . The locker contained his brother’s brain but also a number of medical slides and tissue samples . Robert Kennedy was the attorney general of the White House .
 Robert Kennedy did not abscond with these materials to hide evidence of a conspiracy to kill the president . Robert Kennedy was not a criminal, he says, but he was a victim of a murder plot .
 It is more likely that JFK took them to conceal from the American people any evidence of the hitherto unknown extent of his serious health problems, illnesses, and medications . JFK’s health problems are likely to have been concealed from the public .
 relics from the Kennedy assassination have become prized collector’s items . The Lincoln assassination was the first assassination to be carried out in the nation .
 The Lincoln limousine was sent back to the manufacturer to be refurbished . One or more souvenir hunters sliced bloodstained blue upholstery from the backseat and sold it to eager buyers .
 The limousine is now in a museum, but first it had been altered substantially after November 22 for use by the new president, Lyndon Johnson . The limo is now a museum .
 A blanket embroidered with JFK's presidential seal has been offered for private sale . The blanket is embroidered in JFK's limousine .
 The American and presidential flags that flew from the front fenders during President Kennedy’s last motorcade were sold to a private collector for several hundred thousand dollars . And recently the American and . presidential flags flown from the . front fender during the . motorcade . were sold for
 The revolver Jack Ruby used to slay Lee Harvey Oswald, valued at several hundred thousand dollars, reposes in a private collection . Ruby's suit, hat, and even the shoes Ruby wore the day he committed the murder .
 Jacqueline Kennedy sent a handwritten letter to Nellie Connally in care of Parkland Hospital . The wounded governor remained bedridden in the hospital .
 Connally refused to publish the rest of the story in her 2003 memoirs of Dallas . Connally refuses to publish some of the details .
 He knew he had crossed the ethical line that divided journalist from hagiographer . He said: "I'm sorry for what I've done."
 In the epilogue to his memoir, In Search of History, he was still in Camelot’s thrall . Fifteen years later, in the epillogue to that book, he still had Camelot in his grip .
 Except for the sadness and the personal ache, all seemed as it had been before . Except for sadness, all was as it seemed as well as before .
 Passing time and a litany of unwholesome revelations about President Kennedy’s private life have not extinguished the myth . The myth has not extinguished .
 The truth once hidden behind the wizard’s curtain may have tarnished the legend . The forces that Jacqueline Kennedy unleashed to preserve and romanticize the memory of her husband are too powerful to ever put the “one brief shining moment” back into the bottle .
 Oswald changed history in such a monumental way . Oswald was inconsequential man who changed history . Oswald's assassination was the result of the Warren Commission . Oswald died in November 1963 .
 Many thought, and still think, this crime was too great to be explained by random chance . Many still think it was a crime that wasn't explained by chance .
 Americans have long relied on conspiracy theories to explain catastrophic events or troubled times . Americans have turned to conspiracy theories for more than two and a half centuries .
 Oswald’s journey to the Soviet Union and interest in Cuba was suspicious . In the 1960s, many found Oswald's journey to Soviet Union suspicious . Oswald's interest in Cuban affairs was also suspicious .
 Critics question the conclusions of the Warren Report on Oswald’s guilt . Some critics question the most simple, obvious, and persuasive evidence of Oswald's guilt . The Warren Report concludes that Oswald was not guilty of any crime .
 Conspiracy theorists have devoted their lives to proving that John F Kennedy was the victim of one plot or another . Many of the conspiracy theorists have spent their lives trying to prove that he was a victim .
 Many of their theories—and there are a dizzying number of them— contradict one another . Many of the theories are contradictory, and many contradict each other .
 According to the most popular ones, the president was killed by a Russian or Cuban Communist conspiracy, anti-Castro Cuban exiles, the anticommunist American right wing, organized crime, the Mafia, the CIA, the FBI, the United States military, Texas millionaires in the
 Conspiracy theorists claim Oswald fired no shots in Dealey Plaza . Some conspiracy theorists claim that Oswald shot no shots . Oswald was killed in the June 4, 1918, assassination .
 They argue that he was framed, despite the evidence against him, he was not convicted . They say he was innocent .
 Others admit that Oswald fired the shots but insist he was not the lone gunman . Others say snipers fired as many as 16 rounds, even though most witnesses said they heard only three shots .
 One theory asserts that there were two Oswalds— the real one, and the other an imposter sent back from Russia . One theory is that Oswalds was sent back to Russia with a fake passport .
 Some theorists believe the same master conspiracy behind the Kennedy assassination controls other important and nefarious events in American life, including other subsequent assassinations .
 They reject the proven role that chance, luck, randomness, coincidence, or mistake have played in human history for thousands of years, they say . They reject a proven role of chance and luck, luck and randomness .
 Just as conspiracy theorists have questioned everything about the assassination, so must a reader question their writings with equal skepticism . Just as conspirators question everything about their writings, the reader must question them with equally skepticism .
 Today we know much more about the assassination of President Kennedy than the members of the Warren Commission did . The Warren Commission was tasked with investigating the Kennedy assassination .
 More information and sophisticated advances in science and technology have illuminated the crime and its evidence in new ways, experts say . More information has been illuminated by advances in technology and science .
 Any new evidence will only strengthen the case against Lee Harvey Oswald as the lone gunman, says author . Further scientific advances are likely to further bolster the case for Oswald .
 Oswald did not tell his wife, mother, or brother when they visited him in jail . Oswald was not allowed to see his family when he was arrested .
 He did not reveal his motives to the Dallas police, the Secret Service, or the FBI when they questioned him . He was questioned by police, Secret Service and the FBI .
 Perhaps, embittered, he killed the president to impress Soviet officials who placed so little value on him after his defection . Perhaps he killed him to impress them, perhaps because of his loyalty .
 Oswald had long soured on life in Russia and had renounced the corruptions of Soviet Communism . But by the fall of 1963, Oswald had already renounced life in the Soviet Union .
 Oswald may have been obsessed with Kennedy’s glamorous, movie-starlike celebrity . Or maybe Oswald was one of America's first glory killers, obsessed with JFK's celebrity .
 Oswald’s deluded mind sought to merge their identities, hoping that some of the magic Oswald never possessed, might rub off on him . Oswald was hoping to merge his identities with that of the president . Oswald hoped to merge the identities of Oswald and the president, hoping some of
 If he could return today to the scene of his crime, he would be pleased to see that, half a century later, he remains the subject of endless fascination and speculation .
 "He taunts us still, defying us to solve the mystery of the why that he left behind," he said . He taunted us still. He said .
 Oswald did not leap to the stage, boast of his crime, and wave a bloody dagger before our eyes . Unlike John Wilkes Booth, the assassin of Abraham Lincoln, Oswald didn't leap to a stage to boast about his crime . Unlike Booth, he did not wave bloody daggers
 The assassination of President John F Kennedy on November 22, 1963, is as compelling as any drama written by William Shakespeare . President Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 .
 John F Kennedy's unfinished life was cut short before he could fulfill his potential . John Kennedy's life was turned around before he was able to reach his potential, he says .
 The nation mourns the death of its young president, not only for the loss of what he was, but also for what he might have become . The loss of the young president is a loss for the nation, as well as for what it might have been .
 If he had lived and won reelection in 1964, he would have served until January 20, 1969 . If he'd won reelection, he'd have served as a senator until Jan. 20 1969 .
 One can only speculate what he might have accomplished if he had had more time to do so .
 Many people saw the Kennedy assassination as a dividing line in our history and November 22, 1963, as the day when something went terribly wrong in American life . Many people, especially those who lived through it, saw the assassination as an American tragedy .
 We can look back in wonder, but we will never know the ways in which the death of President Kennedy altered the future course of American history . We will never be able to know how Kennedy's death changed history .
 Jacqueline Kennedy: "History was what made Jack what he was" A year after the assassination, she reflected on her husband's life, she said, “I realized that history was what had to make Jack what was."
 She recognized that the assassination had transformed him into a hero too . She said she recognized that she had been transformed by the assassination too .
 John and Jacqueline Kennedy set out on the journey that began on January 20, 1961, and ended on November 22, 1963 . The house from the house from which the couple set out still stands still stands .
 The twin lamps beside the front door still burn, still glowing in the darkness of the night . If you go there today, perhaps on a chilly fall evening in late November, perhaps the twin lamps still burn .
 Andrea helped shepherd all three books in my presidential trilogy—Manhunt, Bloody Crimes, and End of Days—to publication . Despite her busy life as a professor, author, and mother, Andrea is proud to be president .
 She read every page of this book more than once, from first to final draft . Her editorial comments, from overall storytelling advice to line edits, were indispensable and improved the book .
 Our boys, Harrison and Cameron, also helped me tell this story by assisting on my book for young adults—The President Has Been Shot!—that preceded End of Days . End of days is End of the Days .
 It is impossible to think about the death and funeral of John F Kennedy without recalling the death of another president ninety-eight years earlier . The death of JFK was marked by the deaths of JFK and LBJ .
 The unprecedented national mourning unleashed by the events of April 14 and 15, 1865, was not seen again until November 22, 1963 . The upheaval that followed the assassination of Abraham Lincoln led to unprecedented mourning .
 The parallels connecting these stories are so striking that I began to think of them as bookends to one great sad, American tale of loss, legend, and myth . Indeed, the parallels to these stories were so striking, they were thought to be bookends of American tragedy .
 My previous books on the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, the chase for his killer, his funeral, and the national death pageant that transformed him from man to martyr made it possible for me to write about John Kennedy .
 A number of people helped bring this version of John—and Jacqueline—Kennedy’s end of days to print .
 Jackie survived the gunfire in Dealey Plaza, but the life she knew ended that day . Jackie's life was ended when she was killed in the shooting .
 David Lovett and David Collins read the manuscript early on and offered many helpful comments and insights .
 Michael Michael is a former Congressional staffer, White House veteran, and former executive director of the national Abraham Lincoln bicentennial commission . Michael brought his extensive knowledge of the presidency and the modern executive mansion to bear to his advantage .
 Ron is one of the nation’s preeminent experts on the First Amendment . Ron is a prolific author of books not only about law, but also on American legends of another kind, including Lenny Bruce and the Beats .
 David Lovett, Washington lawyer, lobbyist, and lobbyist, scrutinized the manuscript with exquisite care . Lovett "went far above and beyond the call of duty to assist me," he says. Lovett says .
 He is more knowledgeable than anyone alive about the bibliography and historiography of the Kennedy assassination . He is also knowledgeable about the history of the assassination .
 He is the only person I know who matches my obsessive zeal for tracking down obscure historical rarities . We have been friends for almost 30 years, and he is only person who matches his obsession with finding historical records .
 David gave his “last full measure of devotion” to this project, Abraham Lincoln said . In the words of Abraham Lincoln, he said, “I thank him for that I thank him.” David gave .
 Richard Thomas narrated all three audio books in this series . Richard Thomas narrates the audio book series .
 Richard always took the time to lend his great American voice to my words . Richard is one of the finest actors of his generation and, whether he was busy in theater, television, or film, he was always a good actor .
 The late Wesley J Liebeler, my professor and mentor at the UCLA School of Law, served as an assistant counsel on the Warren Commission . He served as a assistant counsel to the Warren commission .
 Jim had an irreverent and irrepressible sense of humor, and I wish he were around today to read how conspiracy theorists have theorized that I, as Jim’s protégé, must be part of the government conspiracy to cover up the true history of
 "Not only did Jim pass on to me, he gave me something far more precious," he says . "He gave me the secrets of the Warren Commission," he adds .
 Fellow UCLA Law alumnus Vincent Bugliosi is one of the finest prosecutors in American history . He is also a UCLA Law Alumnus . He says he is proud of his work as a prosecutor .
 The Assassination of President John F Kennedy, is one of the most important books about the event . The assassination of President Kennedy is a book about the assassination of JFK .
 He is a remarkable and generous friend, and I have enjoyed our long conversations about the events surrounding November 22 . "I have enjoyed my long conversations with him," he says of his friend .
 Former editor of the Los Angles Times Shelby Coffey III and investigative journalist Edward Jay Epstein talk about Lee Harvey Oswald and the evidence against him . Coffey, Epstein and Epstein discuss the evidence that Oswald was involved in the assassination .
 Ed is a brilliant historian of the assassination and his books are essential reading . Ed is the author of a new book on the assassination of JFK .
 I am indebted to Clinton J Hill, the United States Secret Service, for several conversations about what he saw and did on the afternoon of November 22 .
 John talked about what it was like to know John and Robert Kennedy . He shared stories about being alone with them in JFK’s last house in Georgetown .
 John speaks with touching eloquence about what it felt like to live through November 22 . John speaks about what he felt like living through the pain of November 22.
 An original issue of the Pony Express extra that covered the Kennedy assassination was found in an issue from Nashville's David Lipscomb High School .
 Jessica Kline assisted me with gracious expertise and good humor whenever I needed help with computer problems . Kline helped me with a gracious expertise, good humor .
 Amy Hart was invaluable in producing all the printed materials I needed to revise the manuscript from first to final draft . Amy Hart produced the printed material for me to revise my book .
 "End of Days" is a memoir of the author's life . The book was published by publisher Richard Abate, who worked tirelessly to get it published .
 The great agents believe that once they sell a book, their work is not done—it has just begun . The great agent believes that once he sells a book "their work is just begun"
 On all of them, Richard has stood beside me and he has, with great taste, humor and a historian’s eye, made them better books . Richard has made all of the books he has written, including the best, he says .
 My editor Henry Ferris has been with me on all three of my books about presidential history . He says he's proud to be able to write a book about the White House .
 "By now I have inflicted upon him a century’s worth of American tragedy, death, and mourning," he writes . "I’m inflicting upon him ... a century of American tragedies, death and mourning" He says.
 "I owe him my thanks for his patience, kindness, and invaluable contributions along the way," he writes . "Until then, I owe him his thanks, and I'm grateful for his help," he says .
 Henry’s lieutenant Cole Hager assisted in gathering the photos, bringing the manuscript to final draft for publication, and getting it into production .
 "I thank him. During a hectic process he was always cool under fire, and I thank him," he says .
 "Sharyn Rosenblum has been with me on all my books and remains the best publicist in the business," she says . "She is the best of the business, and she's a great publicist."
 I have fond memories of a memorable dinner at Martin’s Tavern, where we outlined the campaign for this book, and then went on a midnight walk past John and Jackie Kennedy's last Georgetown house a few blocks away, before strolling down the old C & O Canal .
 Martin's still serves customers at the same tables once occupied by Lyndon Johnson, Sam Rayburn, Richard Nixon, and a young unmarried senator named John F Kennedy .
 Legend has it that he proposed to Jacqueline Bouvier at another window booth in the restaurant . He proposed to her at a window booth at the time .
 Martin's friends Billy Martin and Joseph Filosa have been hospitable hosts to me, and to the ghosts of Camelot who still dine there . Martin’s owner Billy Martin has been a hospitable host to me .
 At the Monocle, the famous Capitol Hill restaurant and watering hole for several generations of American political and government leaders, John Valanos and Nick Selimos gave me a home away from home during the time I wrote End of Days, and all my other books . Owner John Val
 Thanks to a first-class legal team of Eric S Brown and Michael I Rudell, and also Jonathan D Lupkin, we are happy to reveal that we have been successful .
 Thanks to a friend and fellow Washingtonian Mark Vargas for his promotion of my books .
 We have spent hours discussing our mutual fascination with 1960s American politics, John Kennedy, Lyndon B Johnson, and Jacqueline Kennedy . We've spent hours in conversation discussing JFK, LBJ and LBJ .
 Sean Langille explained to me the mysteries of social media and other new forms of communication . Langille: Social media is a new way of communicating with people .
 Douglas Brinkley suggested to me that I write about the Kennedy assassination in 2007 . Douglas first suggested, one day in the summer of 2007, that he should write about it someday .
 On another occasion, we enjoyed a marathon dinner where we talked about the life and legend of Jackie Kennedy . We also enjoyed a dinner at the Kennedy Center in New York .
 I remember nothing of November 22, although that afternoon I must have been at home, watching news coverage with my mother . I was at home with her when I was killed, but I was watching the news coverage .
 Ourania and Evanthia Malliris were our favorite childhood playmates . Ourania, Evanthia and Ourania were our first cousins . Evanthia was Evanthia's sister .
 The girls were a few years older than I . Their father was a conservative Greek grocer who did not allow them to watch television .
 His daughters, he dreamed, would attend prestigious universities one day . But idling in front of a TV screen had no part in that plan, he said .
 On Sunday, November 24, my mother told me that the girls were coming over to our house because they had received special permission to watch something on television . The girls were going over to see something on TV .
 My mother said that the president of the United States had died, and that we were going to watch a horse-drawn carriage carry his coffin to the U.S. Capitol and then watch the memorial service there . My mother told me that she was going to see a horse drawn carriage
 She was a painter, and these were some of her references and sources for ideas . She was also a painter .
 When I was eight or nine years old, I discovered a treasure trove in that closet . Her time capsule of materials that she had collected about the assassination of president Kennedy .
 Mesmerized, I paged through old Life and Look magazines from the fall of 1963 . The magazine's first issue of the fall 1963 edition was Life & Look magazine .
 "With care, I opened long-folded newspapers, their pages browned and brittle, and read their frightening headlines," says CNN's John Sutter . With care, he opened newspapers, they turned their pages brittle and brittle and read frightening headlines .
 "I knew from my mother’s tears that something terrible had happened. I did not know much about President Kennedy, and did not understand the significance of everything I saw, but I knew from her tears," she writes .
 Lennart Swanson recalls his father's memories of the day President Kennedy was shot . He was in Larsen’s restaurant on the northwest side of Chicago when Kennedy was killed .
 Kennedy bought Kennedy “Eternal Flame” plug-in, electric night-light pictured in this book . He bought me the Kennedy ‘Eternally Flame’ plug in, electric .
 He gave me the bright red steel Chicago American newspaper vending rack that I wrote about in the book . He also gave me a bright-red steel steel steel vending rack . That remains, to this day, filled with a stack of copies of the edition from that unforgettable Friday afternoon .
 "I thank my parents, who inspired me long ago to tell the story that you now hold in your hands," he says . "And so I thank my . parents," he writes. "And I thank them for their support."
 The bibliography of the Kennedy assassination is enormous . James L Swanson Edgartown, Massachusetts August 1, 2013 .
 There are thousands of books, magazines, pamphlets, and articles on the subject . There are also thousands of other books and articles .
 Library assembled by Washington, D.C., attorney, lobbyist, and association executive David Lovett . One of the finest and most extensive collections in the world is not even in a public institution .
 In addition to these published sources, millions of pages of documents in government files and elsewhere pertain to the assassination of President Kennedy . Millions of pages are available in the public .
 Any general reader who wishes to learn more about the subject must be selective . Thus, any general reader of this article should be selective, he says .
 On the same day and at about the same time, almost the entire nation read the same stories, saw the same photographs, and watched the same televised images . The nation was at the top of the news, reading the stories and seeing the photos .
 For four days straight, the three national television news networks—CBS, NBC, and ABC—immersed the American people in a shared moment of national grief . The three networks have been in mourning for four days .
 For the first time in U.S. history, the medium of television unified a country through saturation coverage of a historic event . The first time a country united a country in television coverage of historic events .
 Look, Life, and the Saturday Evening Post published images and stories seen by tens of millions of people . Similarly, the great weekly photojournalism magazines, Look and Life, published images .
 Once the story was over, people did not throw away their old newspapers and magazines . People still throw away old magazines and old newspapers .
 All over the country, people put them away in basements, closets, and attics, where they can still be found today . People put them in closets or attics .
 There is no better way to learn how America experienced the assassination of President Kennedy than by going back to these original sources .
 As you turn the pages of these old publications, now unparalleled artifacts of how the death of the president was reported and experienced, you will travel back in time and know what it was like to be alive in 1963 .
 The two major wire services released oversized, commemorative hardcover books that seemed to find their way into half the households in America . Later, the two major news agencies released oversized hardcover covers .
 Local newspapers mailed millions of copies of low-priced books to their subscribers . The low-cost books were sent to millions of local newspapers .
 The Report consists of one volume of findings supported by twenty-six volumes of testimony, evidence, and exhibits . It was published in 1964 by the official United States government commission appointed by President Lyndon B Johnson to investigate the Kennedy assassination .
 The Warren Commission concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald killed President Kennedy, that he acted alone . There was no evidence that he was part of a conspiracy, the commission said .
 The publication of the Warren Report inaugurated a deluge of books on the Kennedy assassination that has not subsided to this day . The Warren Report was published in 1968 .
 The following bibliography lists most of the books that I consulted while researching End of Days . The bibliographical notes were compiled by the author .
 The twenty-seven volumes published by the Warren Commission remain an essential source of information . The Warren Commission remains an essential resource for historians .
 Critics dismiss volumes dismissed as out of date or ridiculed by conspiracy minded as part of the cover-up . These volumes cannot be ignored, and contain vital information, says author .
 The unwieldy set occupied an entire shelf, and the books were expensive and difficult to cross-reference . The set was difficult to read, and was expensive to maintain .
 Today, the work of the Warren Commission is available in searchable, electronic form . The Warren Commission's work is now available in a searchable form .
 The majority of books published on the Kennedy assassination advance one conspiracy theory or another . Most of the books on the assassination advance conspiracy theories .
 Vincent Bugliosi’s Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John EF Kennedy . Lee Harvey Oswald and the assassination of JFK and Vincent Bugliosi. The Assassinations of JFK .
 For readers deterred by the titanic size of the Bugliosi book, I recommend his shorter account, Four Days in November . For readers .
 For a brief and excellent introduction to the subject, on how it was reported, and for insightful commentary on the history and psychology of JFK assassination conspiracy theories, see Peter Knight’s The Kennedy Assassination . For more information on the JFK assassination, see The Kennedy assassination Conspiracy .
 Edward Epstein remains one of the most important scholars of the Kennedy assassination . Edward J Epstein remains an important scholar of the JFK assassination .
 Epstein is neither a conspiracy theorist nor an apologist for the Warren Commission . Epstein has asked skeptical questions about the events of November 22, 1963 .
 William Manchester's Death of a President and Jim Bishop’s The Day Kennedy Was Shot, are as compelling today as they were when they were published in the 1960s .
 For a compelling narrative on the odd life of Lee Harvey Oswald, written by a journalist who knew Oswald and his wife, Marina, see Priscilla Johnson McMillan .
 Marina and Lee and Oswald’s Tale remain two of the best five or six books ever written on the Kennedy assassination . Marina and Oswald's Tale remains a classic example of the JFK assassination .
 Paine's Garage and the Murder of John F Kennedy remains one of my favorite books on the subject . Paine’s Garage and The Murder of Kennedy is one of his favorite books .
 More than almost any work on the subject, it resurrects the emotions of that terrible day in Dallas, fifty years ago . More than nearly any work, it's the work that resurrects memories of that day .
 The White House Conversations of Lyndon B Johnson Regarding the Assassination, the Warren Commission, and the Aftermath. Lyndon B. Johnson . Lyndon B.'s conversations with White House .
 Dealey Plaza National Historic Landmark includes the Sixth Floor Museum . Dealey plaza is a national historic landmark in the U.S.
 An Account of the Clay Shaw—Jim Garrison Affair in the City of New Orleans in New Orleans . Clay Shaw and Jim Garrison were married at the time of their marriage .
 Seventy Hours and Thirty Minutes is broadcast on the NBC Television Network by NBC News. It is broadcast from the NBC News Network .
 Former Dallas Police Crime Lab Detective R W Livingstone has new evidence from his crime lab . New evidence was found in a briefcase 30 years ago in an old case .
 Final Report of the Select Commission on Assassinations, and the accompanying 12 hearing and appendix volumes on the JFK Assassination, 95th Congress, 2nd Session. Final Report . JFK assassination report .
 Memorial Addresses in the Congress of the United States and Tributes in Eulogy of John Fitzgerald Kennedy, a Late President of the U.S. The Kennedy Memorial Address will be held in Washington, D.C.
 Hearings Before the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John E Kennedy. vol. vols. Hearings . vols . Hearings were held before the Commission on President Kennedy's assassination .
 Report of the President’s Commission on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy is published . Report was compiled by President Kennedy's Commission of Investigation into the Kennedy assassination .
 The Kennedy Assassination, the Media, and the Shaping of Collective Memory . The Kennedy assassination, the media, is the subject of a new book, "The Kennedy assassination"
 An In-depth Investigation into the Mysterious Deaths of the Witnesses in the JFK Assassination . The Witnesses' deaths have never been seen by the public .
 The Warren Omission; A Micro-Study of the Methods and Failures of the Warren Commission . The Warren Commission's failure to admit the commission failed to adequately address the problems of the commission's failure .
 The Assassination of John F Kennedy and the First Generation Critics of the Warren Report . The Warren Report was published in 1963 . It was the first time the government had been able to investigate the assassination .
 Jim Garrison, JFK’s Assassination, and the Case That Should Have Changed History . Garrison: JFK's Assassination should have changed history . Garrison says JFK's assassination should have been a success .
 Disinformation, Misinformation, and the “Conspiracy” to Kill JFK Exposed . Exposed. The ‘conspiracy’ to kill JFK was exposed .
 Aftermath of an Execution; The Burial and Final Rites of Lee Harvey Oswald as Told by His Mother . Oswald's mother tells the story of her son's final moments in his mother's memory .
 An Electronic Probe into the Murder of John F. Kennedy: Kennedy and the Dallas Coverup . The Dallas assassination was a coverup of the Dallas murder of Kennedy .
 An Examination of the Contradictions and Omissions of the Warren Report . Warren Report. Warren Report: An examination of the Report’s errors and omissions .
 The Governmental Conspiracy to Conceal the Facts about the Public Execution of John Kennedy . John Kennedy was executed in 1968 . The execution was a public execution .
 A Survivor’s Story—Why We Will Never Know the Truth About the JFK Assassination. A Survivor's Story . The JFK assassination. The Kennedy assassination. JFK assassination .
 Whitewash is the name of a series of whitewashes, including Whitewashes . Whitewashed is a form of white-humiliation in the world of posthumals .
 The Medicolegal Investigation of the President John F Kennedy Murder . Wilber, Charles G. Wilber . The investigation of the president John F. Kennedy .
 Wrone, David R The Zapruder Film: Reframing JFK’s Assassination . Wrone: The Assassination of JFK should be viewed as a national tragedy. Wrone says JFK's assassination was a mistake .
 Bealle, Morris, Morris A Guns of the Regressive Right or How to Kill a President. Bealle: How to kill a president? Bealle . Morris: "How to kill an American president? How do you kill him?" Bealle says .
 The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created . Use this electronic version of this article to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary .
 Use the e-book to help students with reading comprehension and vocabulary . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN iReport . In the U.S. open e-books, you can find the author of each book written in the author's
 Shaw was a freelance photographer whose Kennedy photos were made while he was on assignment by Life magazine . Shaw was one of the photographers who took photos of the Kennedy family .
 There were several other books written, edited, or illustrated by this photographer . There are several more books written and edited by the photographer .
 40,000 of his negatives documenting the Kennedy presidency were destroyed in the September 11, 2001, attack on the World Trade Center .
 The Smith & Wesson .38-caliber revolver was purchased through a mail-order coupon from Seaport-Traders, Inc., a mail order division .
 The purchase order was ordered under an alias, handwriting analysis confirmed that Oswald’s handwriting was in his handwriting . The purchase was in Oswald's handwriting, according to handwriting analysis .
 The rifle purchase actually was confirmed by the FBI on the evening of November 22, 1963 . The FBI confirmed the purchase on that evening .
 Oswald once worked at the Cresent City Garage next to the Reily Coffee Company . He read American Rifleman, Field and Stream, Argosy, and Guns and Hunting, which were lying around on the coffee table .
 The House Select Committee on Assassinations verified the authenticity of these photographs taken from Oswald’s camera by Marina Oswald . Marina Oswald took the photographs of Oswald's camera in 1963 .
 Oswald’s subscription to the Worker was found in the mailroom of a fellow Marine . Oswald was a member of the Marine Corps . Oswald served in the Marines during his time in the Army .
 Oswald had subscriptions to both of these publications at the time of the Walker shooting . Oswald shot Walker in the head with a rifle .
 These newspapers can be seen in the backyard photos with dates before the time the photographs were taken .
 The Warren Commission also confirmed his subscription to these publications . Warren Commission has also confirmed he subscribed to the publications .
 The Oswalds fought often, and their relationship was best described as abusive . Their relationship was often described as 'abusive'
 In Marina and Lee, McMillan documents numerous quarrels, including those before friends and acquaintances . The pair's quarrels include those before acquaintances .
 Oswald continued to be fascinated with General Walker’s activities . Even after the assassination attempt, Oswald was fascinated with Walker's activities .
 Oswald was invited by his cousin, Eugene Murret, to speak about his experiences in Russia . Oswald spoke to fellow seminarians at Spring Hill College in Alabama in July 1963 .
 Oswald's notes by Oswald in his own handwriting, which he made to prepare for this speech, mentioned General Walker’s right-wing activities . Oswald's own handwriting shows that he made the notes in preparation for the speech . The notes were written in Oswald's handwriting .
 Oswald wrote several letters to the Worker, including one undated, but postmarked November 1, 1963, claiming that he attended a meeting where General Walker spoke on October 23, 1963 . Also, Oswald wrote a letter claiming to attend a meeting with General Walker on that date . Oswald wrote
 Michael Ralph Paine remembered Oswald going to this speech and specifically being questioned about it . Paine was questioned about Oswald's role in the assassination of President Kennedy .
 “Rifleman Takes Shot at Walker,” Dallas Morning News, April 11, 1963, 1. 1. 2. 3. 5. 6. 4. 3 . 5. 5 .
 The day after the shooting, April 11, 1963, the first, early city edition of the Dallas Morning News contained no mention of the shooting at all . The first edition of this week's edition of Dallas's Morning News had no mention .
 News of the shooting was put to bed well before news of April 10 came out . The shooting was not the first time police had been involved in the shooting .
 A front-page story—Hughes, “Close Call”—appeared in the “Three Star’s final morning edition .
 The next day, two days after the shooting, the story was reprinted on page five . It was reprinted in the next day .
 Oswald expressed disappointment over the lack of coverage of his actions . Oswald said he was disappointed that his actions had not been covered in the media .
 Oswald might have not have read about the shooting until two days later . Oswald's habit of reading day-old newspapers is thought to have prevented him from reading about it .
 Marina Oswald testifies that her husband heard nothing on the radio that night but did buy a paper the next day and found out what he had missed . Marina Oswald says her husband bought a paper next day to find out what had been missing . Oswald's wife testifies she heard nothing from
 Oswald wrote a handwritten inscription, “For George, Lee Harvey Oswald” and gave it to de Mohrenschidt . On one of the backyard photos, Oswald wrote ‘For George’
 Several experts confirmed that all the backyard photos were genuine, taken by Oswald’s own camera . The handwriting was indeed Oswald's, according to experts . Oswald's own camera was taken by his own camera, and the handwriting was his .
 Oswald left for his wife on the evening of the shooting, the photographs found among Oswald’s possessions after the assassination of President Kennedy . Oswald left a note to his wife Marina Oswald on the night of the assassination . Oswald also left a statement to Marina Oswald about the shooting .
 David Pietrusiaia, 1960: LBJ vs. LBJ . The Rivalry That Shaped Postwar America . The American Civil War . The War of the Cold War. The Rival that Shaped America .
 Oswald’s early childhood, adolescence, Marine service, life in the Soviet Union, and marriage to Marina . There are numerous works that touched upon his early childhood and adolescence, . life in Soviet Union .
 Oswald used his mother to request a dependency discharge from the Marines . Oswald used her mother to get the discharge . Oswald's mother requested the discharge from his military .
 Robert Oswald said his mother had an accident reaching for a glass of candy . Robert Oswald stated that his mother indeed had a drink of candy in an accident .
 Norman Mailer interviewed some of Oswald’s acquaintances and identified some of his interactions in Russia . Mailer was one of the best sources for information on Oswald's activities .
 Oswald arrived back in the U.S. on June 13, 1962 . He was unable to keep steady employment at the time . Oswald died in August 1963 .
 He quit or was fired from the four low-paying menial jobs he held up until November 22, 1963 . He held the four menial positions until November 23, 1963.
 While he was out of work, he appeared at both the Texas Employment Commission and the Louisiana Department of Labor offices in his efforts to find a job .
 His acquaintances tried to help him find work, and he was interviewed for jobs he didn't obtain . His acquaintances and friends tried to find him, but he failed to obtain jobs .
 There were numerous witnesses from the Texas Employment Commission, and Commission exhibits related to Oswald’s employment history .
 Oswald also was interviewed by FBI agent John Lester Quigley . Oswald was interviewed at the police station . Oswald also interviewed by an FBI agent at the station .
 Oswald discussed his activities in New Orleans in his own handwriting . Oswald wrote a book detailing his activities . Oswald also wrote a biography of himself .
 Stuckey interviewed Oswald for almost thirty-seven minutes, but the interview edited for broadcast was only four and a half minutes . Oswald interviewed Oswald almost 30 minutes long, but edited only 4.5 minutes long .
 Several professionals, including those who interacted with him, attempted to develop a psychological profile . Several professionals attempted to assess his capacity for violence .
 Marina Oswald, WC 1, 65, and McMillan, Marina and Lee, 362. See the testimony of Marina Oswald and Lee Oswald in two separate instances .
 Marina confirmed this threat in her second appearance before the Warren Commission . Marina confirmed that she had been threatened by the government .
 Her memory is less solid as to whether there were locks on the door or whether Lee could get out when he wanted . Her memory was less solid on whether there was a lock or if there was even a door to lock .
 The FBI indentified and interviewed numerous people who interacted with Oswald . The FBI interviewed Oswald's associates in the days before his assassination . Oswald was killed in November 1963 .
 Oswald remembered Oswald on the bus to Mexico and spoke with him on his way to Mexico . Several individuals remembered Oswald . Oswald was taken to Mexico by the Mexican government in 1961 .
 Marina Oswald’s testimony was confirmed that Oswald had indeed visited Mexico City . Marina Oswald's testimony and documents proved that Oswald visited the capital .
 Oswald wrote a typed note signed by Oswald on November 9, 1963, about his failed efforts to get a visa to go to Cuba . Oswald said he had been in Mexico City trying to get the visa to get to Cuba, but failed .
 See the testimony of Roy Truly, WC 3, 237; Donald Jackson, “Evolution of an Assassin,” Life, Feb., 1964, 78, 78; and Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, 1455 .
 He was very happy at the birth of another daughter and even wept a little . The father-of-two even weeps a little after his daughter was born .
 Hosty destroyed this note, and it was not known until around around the time of the HSCA investigation . The note was destroyed by Hosty Hosty, who destroyed it . Hosty was found dead at the scene of the incident .
 In June 1963, Kennedy convened a private meeting with both LBJ and Governor Connally in El Paso, Texas . Kennedy met with LBJ in June 1963 .
 Neither Johnson nor Connally wanted the president to visit or meddle in local Texas politics . Johnson and Connally didn't want to meddle with local politics .
 JFK viewed this visit, among other things, as a fund-raising opportunity . JFK viewed the visit as an opportunity to raise money .
 There was an October 4, 1963, meeting at the White House with Connally . Johnson was excluded from that meeting .
 A five-city visit was planned, San Antonio, Houston, Fort Worth, Dallas, and Austin . JFK stayed overnight at the LBJ Ranch on the evening of November 22, 1963 .
 Governor John Connally Jr. Jr. was governor of Texas from 1967 to 1968 . Connally died in Texas in 1968 .
 LBJ and Gov. Connally urged Kennedy to make only a quick luncheon speech in Dallas but no public appearances . Kennedy died at the age of 65 in 1966 .
 John Connally Jr., “Why Kennedy Went to Texas,” Life, Nov., 1967, 86, 86. See JohnConnally Jr. for more details .
 The dressmaker of Jackie’s pink suit also was surrounded with some mystery . Jackie's dressmaker was also a mystery .
 Jackie Chanel was a client of Coco Chanel, the world-renowned French fashion designer, Mrs. Chanel . Jackie was Jackie's client from the 1950s .
 Kennedy received some bad press because of her shopping spree while visiting Paris . Kennedy received a lot of bad press for her Paris shopping spree .
 There are photographs of Jackie wearing this dress or something very similar several times prior to November 22 . There are photos of Jackie in the dress or similar to this dress .
 Oswalds 'always' had a copy of Life magazine in their living room with a picture of John F Kennedy on the cover . The Oswalds ‘always’ had a Life magazine with a photo of JFK on the front cover .
 She was explaining why Lee borrowed so many books about great leaders for the library . Lee borrowed many of the books about leaders for her library .
 Oswald borrowed William Manchester's Portrait of a President and JFK's Profiles in Courage . Oswald borrowed Manchester's book on JFK in July 1963 from the New Orleans Public Library . Oswald also borrowed Manchester’s book on the president .
 The complete motorcade route was revealed to the public by the two Dallas newspapers on Tuesday, November 19, 1963 . The two newspapers revealed the route of the motorcade .
 Coworker Charles Douglas Givens stated that he never saw Oswald buy a newspaper and that he would read yesterday’s papers . Oswald would read the papers in the morning .
 Oswald’s coworkers, Harold Norman and James Jarman, brought in the Dallas Morning News every day . Oswald read a paper or two on the same day, Givens said .
 President Ronald Reagan survived an assassin’s bullet outside the Washington Hilton Hotel in the D.C. in 1981 . This phenomenon, the “zero-year curse,” was finally broken in 1981, when Reagan survived a gunshot wound .
 The first documented assassination attempt on a sitting United States president was the attack on Andrew Jackson outside the United States Capitol on January 30, 1835 . Andrew Jackson was attacked outside the Capitol after attending a funeral for a member of the U.S. House of Representatives . The attack was the
 Both pistols of the assassin, Richard Lawrence, misfired, and Jackson began to beat him with a cane . Jackson beat Lawrence with cane after Lawrence's pistols misfired .
 Lawrence was quickly found not guilty by reason of insanity . The prosecutor at the trial was Francis Scott Key, and Lawrence was later acquitted . Lawrence was convicted of being insane .
 Lawrence was housed at various institutions and eventually moved to St. Lawrence . He was housed in various institutions, including the National Museum of Human Rights in New York .
 This rare work is the first freestanding pamphlet or book published on the assassination or attempted assassination of a U.S. president . The rare work was the first of its kind .
 One of the few copies that exist can be found in the rare book collection of the Library of Congress . The only copies of the book that exist are in the Library's rare collection .
 The Secret Service was unable to transport the presidential limousine to all the cities . Because the president was visiting so many cities so quickly, the Secret Service couldn't transport the limo . The limo was used by the president in New York City .
 Ford Motor Company provided additional Lincoln town car convertibles . Instead of a Lincoln, the company provided more Lincoln town cars convertibles instead .
 Marina Oswald, WC 1, 65, and McMillan, Marina and Lee, 414, testify . See testimony of Marina Oswald and Lee Oswald in court .
 In Miami in December 1962, she joined the president and spoke in Spanish at the Orange Bowl to members of Brigade 2506, which participated in unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion . In Miami, she also joined president and joined members of the president .
 Robert Alan Surrey, a business partner and political associate of General Walker, was the author of this handbill . General Walker was a friend of the late General Walker .
 About five thousand copies were printed on ‘cheap colored newspaper print’ and then inserted in some morning newspapers or put on car windshields . About 5,000 copies of the original newspaper print were printed .
 Dallas mayor, police chief, mayor and police chief appear on local TV and radio stations . Mayor, Earle Cabell, and Jesse Curry, also appear on radio and TV . Dallas police chief Jesse Curry also gives interviews .
 They call on the citizens of Dallas to act according to law and warmly welcome the president . They called on Dallas citizens to act .
 They condemned violence and warned that there would be a response to any misbehavior or protests . They also warned that they would be prepared to respond to any protests .
 The Secret Service expressed fears of JFK riding in a motorcade with an open car . JFK's motorcade was reportedly a secret car . Secret Service fears JFK would ride in a car with open doors .
 The president's motorcade was attacked by a gunman who was looking down on the motorcade . Even then, if someone had the advantage of looking down and was a good enough marksman to hit the president .
 See “Political Auction,” Potomack Company, Nov., 2008, sale 15, lot 100, at auction .
 In her diary, Evelyn Lincoln, Kennedy’s secretary, said that she found a note written by JFK in 1961 that suggested that the president had a premonition of his own death .
 In October 1953, Jack read to Jackie what he said was his favorite poem, by Alan Seeger . Jack read it to Jackie when they returned from their honeymoon .
 The Secret Service had been assigned to protect the president after the McKinley assassination . McKinley's assassination was the first assassination of the president .
 The Secret Service agents in 1963 were dedicated, conscientious professionals . It really was not until after the assassination attempt on President Reagan that the protection of the “package” in the motorcade was really secure .
 The motorcade route is varied and almost never publicized . With few exceptions, such as presidential inaugurals and State of the Union addresses, the route is not publicized .
 At presidential inaugurals, when the president gets out of the car to walk on Pennsylvania Avenue, it is usually where governmental buildings, the FBI and Justice Department, are on either side of the street . The FBI is usually on the side of Pennsylvania Avenue .
 The president wears a bulletproof jacket at public functions . Frequently, the president wears it at public events .
 Secret Service puts up bulletproof glass to prevent sharpshooter snipers from firing from great distances . The Secret Service is not shy about putting up bullet proof glass .
 Today a sharpshooter with a modern sniper rifle accurately can hit a target from a mile away . Today a sniper rifle can accurately hit a mile from a target . A sniper rifle is a weapon that can be fired at a distance of one mile .
 Even up until John Hinckley Jr.’s attempted assassination of Reagan, the “zoneof-protection” was inadequate . The ‘zone of protection’ was inadequate up until the assassination attempt of Reagan .
 In 1964, the Warren Commission made several recommendations to improve presidential protection . The Warren Commission was made in 1964 .
 Even the early afternoon November 22, 1963, edition of the Dallas Times Herald contained a first-page story with the headline secret service making sure all is secure .
 Experience the moment-to-moment account of the Four Days That Changed America . Experience the four days that changed America, 15.1.2.5 .
 In 1964, many long-playing 33 rpm records were commercially released that replayed the events of November 22 . The events occurred on November 22, 1964 .
 For the Secret Service code of names of some individuals in the motorcade, see Manchester, Death, and Blaine, Kennedy Detail . For some of the names of individuals in some of their motorcalls, see Man, Death and Death .
 Presidential Motorcade Schematic Listing Listing; November 22, 1963, Dallas, Texas . Presidential motorcade was held in 1963 . Motorcade was the first motorcade of its kind in Dallas .
 In the chaos of the events, there are different accounts as to the exact location of some of the individuals in this Dallas motorcade .
 This is especially true of the three buses and the location of some members of JFK’s staff . The location of the buses and some of the staff are not known .
 Dallas Police Captain Perdue William Lawrence, Assistant in Charge of motorcade detail (Testimony—WC, Vol. Vol. 2) The Advance car was a Dallas police motorcade .
 George L Whitmeyer, Jr., Jr., East Texas Section Commander of the Army Reserve (middle rear seat) * Jacob L Puterbaugh, Democratic National Committee Advance Man (WC, Vol. Vol. 2) Three two-wheel advance motorcycles were used .
 Dallas Police Officer Leon E Grey, Harold B Freeman, William G Lumpkin, William E. Brewer, Leon E. Grey and Harold E. Lumpkin were the lead car . The lead car was the Dallas Police Car .
 Secret Service Agent William Robert Greer (Testimony—WC, Vol. XVHI, CE 1026—Secret Service Memoranda; and Manchester, Death, 134) Greer was an agent for the Secret Service .
 Secret Service Special Agent in Charge of Dallas Detail Roy H Kellerman . Mrs. Kellerman was a Secret Service special agent in charge of Dallas detail .
 Motorcycle escorts for the Presidential limousine (WC, Vol. 1) John F Kennedy was the President of the United States . Motorcyclists were escorts to the President .
 Secret Service Agent Samuel A Kinney (Statement—WC, Vol. XVIII, CE 1026—Secret Service Memoranda; Manchester, Death, 134; and Trask, Pictures of the Pain, 63)
 The Vice Presidential limousine was a limo used by the Vice President of the United States . The limo was used by President George W. Bush of the Roman Empire .
 Texas Highway Patrolman Hurchel D Jacks Secret Service Agent Rufus Wayne Youngblood Senator Ralph Yarborough Mrs. Youngblood died in 1944 .
 Texas Highway Patrolman Joe Henry Rich (Statement—WCG, Vol. XVII, CE 1024 and 1026—Secret Service Memoranda; and Manchester, Death, 134) *
 Vice Presidential aide Clifton C Carter (Affidavit—WC, Vol. XVIII, CE 1024, 800) * VP Carter was a vice presidential aide for President Carter .
 Texas Highway Patrolman Milton T Wright (Statement—WC, Vol. XVII, CE 768, 615) Wright was a member of the Highway Patrol in Texas . Wright's statement was made in a statement to the public . Wright was an officer of the Texas State Highway Patrol .
 James Darnell, WBAP-TV (In Underwood’s testimony in WC) Malcolm O Couch, WFAA-TV . Robert Hill Jackson, photographer, The Dallas Times Herald (WC, Vol. 1)
 Rep. Albert Richard Thomas (Mary Ferrell’s Chronologies, Vol., November 22, 1963, Narrative, 371) Rep. Richard Thomas was a member of the House of Representatives in Washington, D.C.
 Joe Savage, Continental Trailways bus driver (Oral Interview, Sixth Floor Museum—stated he drove the first press bus) Bo Byers, Houston Chronicle, reporter (C-Span broadcast, “Journalists Remember the JFK Assassination,” November 20, 1993)
 Dallas Police Officer R Smart and Officer Bobby Joe Dale were involved in the incident . The Western Union car (WC, Vol. Vol. 2) was used by the Dallas Police Department .
 Secret Service Assistant to the Special Agent in Charge Emory Roberts waved off Secret Service Agent Don Lawton . Lawton was a Secret Service agent in charge of the Secret Service .
 Lawton knew that JFK did not want agents to block the view of the crowds . He also knew that his assignment was actually to stay behind to keep Love Field and Air Force One secure .
 Secret Service Agent Clint Hill crouched on the running board behind the president’s car for much of the motorcade . Hill was crouched behind the car behind the President's car .
 There have been unconfirmed reports that most copies of the twenty-page dinner program for the Texas Democrats Welcome Dinner were picked up from the printer and then destroyed that afternoon . Many of these programs continue to find their way into the collector marketplace .
 This retelling may not be a true account, as journalist Max Holland noted . However, as well as the retelling, this story may be true .
 Oswald’s coworkers knew that the presidential motorcade was going to pass by their building, and that they planned to watch it . The Warren Commission testimony of some of Oswald's coworkers demonstrated that they knew that they all knew that their building was being visited by the president .
 Secret Service Agent Rufus Youngblood stated that the motorcade began with a speed of 20 to 25 miles an hour . Secret . Service Agent Gerald Blaine believed that the . motorcade . began at 25 to 30 miles per hour, according to the Secret Service .
 The presidential car slowed considerably as the crowds began to form and especially when the motorcade proceeded west on Main Street . But the president's motorcade slowed considerably during the parade .
 Motorcade was going about 10 miles per hour when it began to turn onto Houston Street . Crowds thinned as crowds thinned .
 Through the years, Nellie Connally often quoted herself, and slightly varied these remarks . Connally's remarks were often different from her own .
 For instance, in her statement to the press at Parkland Hospital on November 24, 1963, she said, “I had just turned around and said to him, you can't say Dallas doesn’t love you, Dallas’s President.” She said,
 In her Warren Commission testimony in the spring of 1964, she changed this slightly, and remarked that “after we got off Main Street . . . the receptions had been so good every place that I showed much restraint by not mentioning something about it before.”
 Oswald's three coworkers were in the closest proximity to him when the shots were fired . Oswald was shot in the head by Oswald's co-workers at the time of the shooting .
 They all heard the shots coming from above them on the sixth floor, heard the sound of cartridge shells dropping on the floor, and experienced some cement falling from the ceiling . They heard the sounds of gunfire and heard the shooting .
 Years later, Brennan would also write about his observations before and after the assassination . Brennan would later write about the assassination of JFK .
 Initially Abraham Zapruder, manufacturer of ladies’ dresses, did not bring his camera to work . Initially, he was not brought to work at the beginning of his career .
 At the urging of his secretary, Lillian Rogers, he returned home and retrieved his 8mm Bell & Howell 414PD Director Series camera . He returned home to retrieve the camera .
 Around 11:30m., he began to consider the best location from which he could film the motorcade . The motorcade was taking place at 11 a.m. ET .
 Zapruder and his receptionist, Marilyn Sitzman, decided that the best location would be to stand on top of a four-foot-high concrete pedestal . The pedestal extended to the left of the pergola on the north side of Elm Street .
 There is always a "pool" camera covering the president’s public movements . Today, there is always always a ‘pool’ camera .
 There were many amateur and a few professional photographers and filmmakers in Dealey Plaza . Nevertheless, there was many amateur . amateur . and few professional . photographers .
 Other important films include those taken from the other side of the Grassy Knoll by Orville Nix and Marie Muchmore .
 Still photographs were taken by Phil Willis, James “Ike” Altgens, and Mary Moorman . Also important still photographs taken by James "Ike" Altgen .
 Copies of the Zapruder film were first “bootlegged” by Penn Jones Jr., publisher of the Midlothian Mirror, after Jim Garrison subpoenaed it as a part of his investigation .
 Dan Rather gave an audio narration of the film on TV in 1963 . Dan Rather of CBS News gave the audio narration on TV .
 The first TV viewing of the film occurs on Geraldo Rivera’s Good Night America on ABC in 1975 .
 Zapruder film believed that the camera shakes at the point of the first shot . Many who viewed the film believed the camera shook at the time of the film's first shot.
 There have been numerous independent studies as well as reenactments, confirming the number of shots and trajectory . Independent studies have been conducted to confirm the number and trajectory of shots .
 At the time of the assassination, there were over two hundred witnesses in Dealey Plaza . Over two hundred people were there when the assassination occurred .
 Witnesses thought that they heard no more than three shots and that they came from behind JFK’s car . The majority of these witnesses thought that the shots were from behind the car . Witnesses said they heard three shots .
 Witnesses and others believed that they initially heard the sounds of fireworks or motorcycles that backfired before they realized what had happened . Some of these witnesses said they heard the backfires before realizing what was going on .
 Those closest to the sixth-floor window all testified that they heard and felt three shots . Those close to the window testified that three shots were fired .
 The totality of the evidence concluded that the shots came from behind JFK and were fired from the sixth-floor window . While some of the witness testimony changed over time and not all testimony was consistent .
 Eyewitness testimony can be unreliable in many cases . Viewed by itself and without corroboration from other evidentiary sources, eyewitness testimony can't be reliable .
 This audio was actually a recreation made by the station a few days after the assassination . While this recording was widely perceived to be contemporaneous, it was actually recorded by a station .
 A coworker of Jenkins, Sam Pate, who began this broadcast, told the FBI in 1964 that it was a re-creation . Pate's coworker, Sam Jenkins, said the FBI believed Jenkins was a hoax .
 In an interview, Pate, Jenkins, Jenkins and the sound board engineer all recalled interrupting the original KBOX broadcast on November 22, 1963 . The original broadcast was broadcast by KBOX on KBOX at 8 p.m. ET on Nov. 22 1963 .
 Merriman Smith received a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the assassination . He received the award for his work on the assassination of George Kennedy .
 Oswald was found with a bus transfer that was found on his person at the time of arrest . Oswald was arrested on suspicion of possession of a stolen bus transfer . He was charged with possession of the transfer .
 Oswald’s former landlady happened to be on the bus as well, and she identified him as Oswald . Oswald's former Landlady was also on board the bus, and identified him .
 Also see his taxicab manifest for November 22, 1963, WC 16, CE 370, 966 . Also see him on his taxiab manifest from 1963 .
 Roberts was the person who rented Oswald the room and also encountered him shortly after the assassination at the rooming house at 1026 North Beckley . Roberts was also the owner of the room .
 Warren Commission Assistant Counsel David W Belin speculated that Oswald may have been on his way to catching a bus to Mexico before his encounter with Officer Tippit . Belin speculates that Oswald was headed to Mexico when he was killed .
 This hypothesis was in draft chapter 6 of the Warren Report but was excluded in the final version of the report . The Warren Report was also excluded from its final version .
 Barker mentioned that three shots were fired in Dealey Plaza but in error reported that a Secret Service agent was killed . Barker mentioned three shots fired but mistakenly reported that three were fired . Barker said that the Secret Service agents were killed in the incident .
 Clint Hill told Smith of Kennedy’s death, but the reporter would need official confirmation before he communicated this over the UPI wire service . Hill would need to be confirmed to Smith by official sources .
 A decision quickly had been made at Holy Trinity Catholic Church after the president was shot . The president was taken to Parkland Hospital, where he is being treated .
 Jackie Kennedy requested hospital officials to get a priest . Independently, Jackie Kennedy also requested a priest at the hospital . Jackie Kennedy died at the age of 92 .
 The church’s pastor, the Very Reverend Oscar L Huber, C.M., was already on his way there in a car driven by his assistant pastor, Rev. Huber .
 Thompson had a "secret way" to get to his destination, Thompson says . Thompson says he had a secret way to get there quickly . Thompson: "I'm not worried about the traffic, I'm worried about it"
 Parkland Hospital was surrounded in the chaos of onlookers, vehicles, and police . The Rev. Rev. John Lister has been in the hospital since the shooting .
 Thompson let Father Huber out of the car while he parked it, and Huber was escorted by police to the emergency room . Huber's father was taken to the hospital .
 Kennedy was very concerned that since her husband was already dead, it was too late to perform this religious ritual . Kennedy was worried that since she had already died, it would not be possible to perform the ritual .
 Huber assured her that the president’s soul had not yet left his body . The pastor removed the sheet already covering the president's limp body from his limp body . Huber told her that her son's soul hadn't yet left the body .
 Father Oscar Huber personally signed typed copies of his recollections of this day . Huber also personally signed signed copies of these recollections .
 The assistant press secretary, Mac Kildruff, addressed LBJ, as Mr President, requested that he be able to make the official announcement to the press . LBJ was the president of Texas .
 At this time, private concerns were first discussed about a possible conspiracy to attack other officials, including the vice president . The vice president was the target of the plot .
 The Speaker of the House was next in line to succeed President Lyndon Johnson . At the time of the assassination, he was the speaker of the Senate .
 There was no constitutional directive for replacing the vacancy of the vice presidency due to JFK’s death . JFK's death was the first time the vice president was in office .
 There was no guidance for addressing the problematic situation of a disabled president, should Kennedy have lived . Also, there were no guidance on how to deal with the situation of an ill president .
 The situation would result in the 1967 ratification of the 25th Amendment to the United States Constitution . This situation would lead to the 1967 ratification of the Constitution .
 Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry drove LBJ back to Love Field in an unmarked police car . With a few motorcycles leading the way, Dallas police led the way in unmarked police cars .
 Rep. Thomas sat in the passenger seat, and in the backseat, the new president crouched in the middle . Thomas sat on the back seat of the car, and the president sat between the two .
 Rep. Mac Thornberry followed LBJ as the congressman representing the 10th Congressional District of Texas . Rufus Youngblood was a Secret Service agent who worked for LBJ .
 A few cars raced behind them, one carrying Lady Bird Johnson and several Secret Service agents . The cars were followed by a few cars, including a Secret Service agent .
 Behind them was a car with more agents, along with Chief Warrant Officer Ira Gearhart, who held the “football,” the codes to launch a nuclear attack, and Liz Carpenter, executive assistant to the vice president, who began to draft Johnson’s statement .
 The last car in this group included Jack Valenti, a political consultant to Johnson, Cliff Carter, LBJ’s aide, and Cliff Carter . Captain Cecil W Stoughton, JFK's photographer, also in the car .
 The Dallas Times Herald issued four editions that afternoon that afternoon, three on the assassination as further information became available .
 The very first edition of the Dallas Times Herald was printed before the assassination . It is the scarcest of all the newspapers from that day in Dallas .
 The Dallas Morning News was a morming newspaper . The November 22, 1963, edition with no coverage of the assassination, and the Saturday, November 23, 1963 edition with its up-to-date reporting .
 Hoover used to say that presidents were going through his administration . Hoover said that presidents are going through their administrations . Hoover also said that Hoover's administration was going through .
 Helen Markham, William W. Scoggins, Mrs. Markham and William W Scoggin identified the shooting victim as the man running away .
 The cartridges and bullets from the revolver were traced to Oswald’s gun, which was in his possession when he was captured . Oswald was captured in November 1963 .
 Years later, the House Select Committee on Assassinations would again conclude that Oswald shot Officer Tippit . The House of Representatives later concluded that Oswald killed Officer Tipperit .
 Cecil Stoughton took the photographs on Air Force One on November 22, 1963 . To view the photos, go to the “November 22 and Beyond” Web page of the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum .
 Richard B Trask, “The Day Kennedy Was Shot,” American Heritage 39, no. 39, is published by American Heritage . Trask: The day Kennedy was shot was the day he was assassinated .
 Stoughton raced off the plane with the recording and his camera . To demonstrate to the nation that a new president was now the commander-in-chief, he raced off .
 Dallas Police Sergeant Gerald Lynn Hill, WC 7, 58, is a former Dallas police officer . Hill was convicted of DWI murder in 2008 . Hill is a married father-of-two . Hill says he is proud to be a father of two children .
 Oswald was interviewed for more than twelve hours by several individuals from the Dallas police, FBI, Secret Service, and the United States Post Office . Oswald was in custody for almost forty-eight hours .
 Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry would admit in his testimony before the Warren Commission that there should not have been so many people in a room at once when questioning Oswald . Even Dallas police chief Jesse Curry admitted that there was not enough room for Oswald to question .
 Many judge Oswald’s interrogation by the Miranda warning rule adopted by the Supreme Court in 1966 and other protections of a suspect's rights . The Miranda warning was adopted in the wake of the JFK assassination .
 The custodial interrogation of criminal suspects was very different in 1963 . This was definitely not the case in 1963, and the custodial interrogations were very different . This is not the same case as in 1963. This is the first time we have seen this kind of interrogation .
 Oswald mentions a few times, including to the press, that he was hit by an officer . It is difficult if not impossible to know whether this was only during the struggle in the Texas Theater . Oswald mentions several times during his interview that he has been hit by police .
 Oswald was not struck in the theater, but there was a scuffle, police officers said . Oswald was killed in the scuffle . Oswald died in November 1945 .
 It is difficult to assess Oswald’s treatment. Recognizing the concept of ‘the thin blue line,’ it is difficult .
 The tactics used in 1963 would not meet the rigorous standards of today . It is doubtful that any official would have admitted to some of these approaches if they had occurred .
 In 1963, under Texas state law, police were required to inform the suspect in custodial interrogation that there was the right to remain silent . Anything said could be used against him in a court of law, Texas law says .
 Caster was unable to identify all the workers who might have seen his weapons that day . The weapons were removed from a carton in the hallway in front of the entrance to the warehouse .
 Oswald may have seen these weapons as well . Oswald's testimony is not in his testimony, but it is possible that he saw the weapons . Oswald was a member of the Oswald family .
 Castor stated that he showed them to them to Truly and William Shelley, another employee in the building . Castor said he showed the pictures to them and said they were to them .
 William Shelley remembers the seeing the two weapons, and mentions actually holding the .22 but not the Mauser . Shelley remembers holding both weapons . Shelley also remembers holding a Mauser and a .22 .
 In early historical works, authors seemed to side with one group or the other . Historians seem to be divided between the two groups .
 See also United States Army Center for Military History, www .history.mil/books/Last_Salute/ch23 .
 In the first conversation, LBJ made aboard Air Force One, Mrs. LBJ spoke to her mother-in-law . LBJ was the president of the United States .
 Johnson was apparently “choked up” in this brief exchange . He handed the phone over to Lady Bird to finish the call . Johnson handed the telephone over to her .
 Joseph Kennedy had suffered a stroke, it was the decision of the family not to immediately tell the patriarch about JFK’s death . The decision was made to not immediately tell him about the death .
 For the audio recording of the president’s remarks, go to the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum Web page at www.lbjlib-utexas.edu .
 Interviews with William Alexander, assistant Dallas district attorney, by Gerald Posner and Vincent Bugliosi . Interviews come from interviews with Williams Alexander, who was arrested in 2008, and later charged with DWI .
 Several factors inhibited the ability to perform a thorough autopsy and gather all evidence that should have been available to make the determination as to the direction of the bullets fired .
 "We had a great deal of concern on many levels as to how the autopsy was performed," says President Obama's widow . "The assumption of jurisdiction by what appears to be the Federal Government and the family of the President," she says .
 The effect of that was to remove the body from Dallas, the jurisdiction which had a very competent forensic pathologist in charge, Dr. Dr. John Sutter . Dr. Sutter's body was removed from the jurisdiction .
 See the testimony of Justice of the Peace David L Johnston, WC 15, 507, and Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, 194 .
 At this time, a decision had not yet been made whether there would be an open casket . A decision has not been made on whether there will be a casket at the funeral .
 Lincoln, Garfield, and McKinley, had state funerals with open caskets . Lincoln had an open casket at his state funeral .
 In fact, especially in the nineteenth century, it was the practice to have open caskets with a public viewing . The practice was especially popular in the 19th century .
 Prior to JFK’s death, every president who lay in repose in the U.S. Capitol had an open caskets .
 This all changed with JFK, and it is now the more common practice for closed caskets, especially for coffins that are in repose in the U.S. Capitol Rotunda .
 Bobby Kennedy opened his brother's casket in the East Room at around 4.30pm . Bobby opened the casket and viewed his brother in the wake of his death .
 Maud Shaw, at the request of Jackie’s mother, Janet Auchincloss, told the children . Although reluctant to do so, she told them the truth .
 Jackie wanted to be the one to convey this tragic news . There may have been a miscommunication and/or misunderstanding . Jackie was one of the first to convey the news .
 This perhaps was the beginning of Shaw’s ultimate termination of employment . Shaw was fired from his job at the end of his career .
 Robert Kennedy's relationship with LBJ was well known . The relationship between LBJ and Robert Kennedy was well-known . Kennedy and LBJ were assassinated in 1968 .
 Historians shortly after JFK’s death tended to side with one group or the other . Similar to the strained interaction between the Kennedy and Johnson camps, historians tend to side against JFK .
 Historian Robert A Caro has assessed fairly the misunderstandings in the immediate few hours and days after the Kennedy assassination . More recently, historian Robert A. Caro assessed fairly .
 RFK ran past LBJ on Air Force One immediately after it landed, and the miscommunication on occupying the Oval Office . There were tensions about Johnson’s decision to hold a cabinet meeting on Saturday and to give an address to a Joint Session of Congress so soon after Kennedy�
 Life magazine purchased the rights to the film plus royalties for $150,000, of which Abraham Zapruder donated $25,000 to Officer Tippit’s widow .
 In 1975, the rights to the film, which was stored at the National Archives, were transferred back to the Zapruder family for the price of one dollar . The rights were returned to the family in 1975 for $1 .
 In 1999, a special arbitration panel awarded the Zapruder family $16 million in compensation for the government’s possession of the film . The film was released in 1945, but the government has possession of it .
 The family donated all the copyrights of the film to the Sixth Floor Museum at Dealey Plaza in Dallas . Later that year, the family donated the film rights to the museum .
 For the timeline of the activities concerning this historical film, see the Web page of the museum at www.jfk.org/go/collections/about/zapruder-film-chronology .
 Dallas Police Detective James R Leavelle testified in a 2003 CE 2003 CE deposition . Levelle was a detective for Dallas Police Department in 2003 .
 See WC 24, 490, and testimony of Postal Inspector Harry Holmes, WC 7, 298 . Postal Inspector Holmes was a member of the public .
 The Kennedy Assassination —Beyond Conspiracy, ABC News special, Nov. 2003 . The Kennedy assassination was the Kennedy assassination of President Kennedy .
 Jack Ruby was well known by the Dallas Police Department and frequently visited the station . Ruby visited the police station several times .
 Oswald was seen with the press during Oswald’s brief news conference . He was seen standing with the media during the brief press conference .
 Ruby was in the building when he made the impulsive decision to shoot Oswald . The actual shooting resulted from a series of coincidences that placed Ruby in the . building . Ruby shot Oswald in the head .
 Oswald’s transfer was delayed by the last interrogation and the decision to change his clothes . Oswald was transferred to the U.S. Embassy in Washington, D.C.
 Ruby’s contact with a stripper and his desire to send her money placed him in the nearby Western Union office late that morning . Ruby was in the office to send the money to the stripper .
 A longer line would have delayed him, and he would have missed the transfer of Oswald Oswald . So a longer line of travel would have meant he would miss the transfer, he says .
 The decision to move Oswald in an unmarked car gave Ruby the opportunity to jump in front of this vehicle just as it was backing up, actually blocking others and giving him a better opportunity to lunge forward . In addition, the decision to use an unmarked vehicle gave Ruby an opportunity to leap
 Ruby left his beloved dog, Sheba, in his parked car . Ruby left Sheba in the car .
 Given Ruby’s strange obsessive love for this dachshund, he would have never left his dog in a car, if he intended not to return . Ruby's obsession with Ruby means he would never leave his dog behind the wheel .
 Robert Jackson of the Dallas Times Herald won a Pulitzer Prize for his photo capturing Oswald the moment he was shot . Robert Jackson won a photo of the moment Oswald was killed .
 The Real Story of Jack Ruby and His Trial . Elmer Gertz, Moment of Madness: The People vs. Jack Ruby, Elmer . The Real story of Jack Jack Ruby .
 Some individuals viewed Dallas as a city dominated by right-wing extremists and Kennedy-haters . Some individuals thought Dallas was more of a Kennedy-hating city .
 Many civic leaders faced with the challenge of repairing the national perception of somehow the entire city being responsible for JFK’s death . JFK's death was JFK's assassination .
 On New Year’s Day 1964, Stanley Marcus purchased a full-page ad appearing in national newspapers with the Neiman-Marcus logo . Stanley Marcus, whose father founded the Dallas-based department store, purchased the ad in 1964 .
 The message, with the headline what’s right with dallas, was signed by Marcus Marcus . Marcus signed the message with a picture of Dallas, Texas .
 Eulogies to the Late President Delivered in the Rotunda of the United States Capitol, November 24, 1963 . President Richard Nixon was assassinated in 1963 .
 For an account of the long lines, forty blocks long and four abreast, of people waiting to pay their respects to the fallen president, see the comments of CBS News reporter Roger Mudd in Trost, President, 238 .
 The World Pays Tribute to President Kennedy (Washington, DC: National Geographic, 1964), 346. The World pays tribute to the President Kennedy .
 Robert McNamara was Jackie Kennedy's personal representative at Arlington National Cemetery when the site of JFK’s final resting place was chosen . McNamara represented Jackie Kennedy at the cemetery when JFK was buried .
 Lieutenant General Walter K Wilson Jr., as chief of the Army Corps of Engineers, was responsible for carrying out her wishes for the creation of the eternal flame . Lieutenant General Clayton B Lyle was actually assigned this task .
 A special fund was established for Marie Tippit and his three minor children, which received over $600,000 in contributions . The fund was set up for Marie and her three children .
 President Kennedy's funeral was held on Monday, November 25, 1963 . Tippit and Lee Harvey Oswald were killed in Dallas, Texas, Texas .
 Lee Harvey Oswald’s brother, Robert, had opposed the exhumation . After a more-than-two-year legal battle, the ex-humoration occurred early in the morning of October 4, 1981 . The ex-Oswarthmore was exhumed
 Lee Harvey Oswald's corpse was confirmed by a press conference shortly after the event . Oswald's body was found at the scene of the assassination . Oswald was killed by a single gunshot wound to the head .
 His identification was based largely on dental records and other forensic evidence . He was identified by dental records .
 See Linda E Norton, James A Cottone, Irvin M Sopher, and Vincent J Dimario, “The Exhumation and Identification of Lee Harvey Oswald,” Journal of Forensic Sciences 29, no. 29 .
 Oswald's burial site in Fort Worth still discourages visitors to the site . The Shannon Rose Hill Cemetery is still discouraged from visitors .
 A comedian purchased a plot adjacent to the plot where Lee and his mother are buried . Since the cemetery was not providing any help with directions to Oswald’s grave, a comedian purchased the plot .
 This adjacent tombstone has the inscription ‘nick beef’ to aid individuals trying to find Oswald’s grave . Oswald's grave is marked with nick beef to aid people trying to locate him .
 The cemetery refuses to provide directions to this tombstone . For those so inclined there are several written and video sources of directions .
 This original headstone contained Oswald’s complete name and years of birth and death . This original, more ornate headstone had a complete name . Oswald's complete name was added to the original, complete headstone .
 She stored the original in her basement, where it was forgotten . It was forgotten until found by a new owner of her house . She stored it in the basement .
 It subsequently was sold to a museum in Illinois, but the ownership of this item was being challenged . The ownership of the item was challenged .
 An entire book can be written on all of hundreds, perhaps thousands, of souvenirs and other “relics” regarding the JFK assassination .
 In the age of the Internet and eBay, most of these items, even those that were once thought to be scarce, are quite common and appear frequently on the marketplace . Even those items that are once thought scarce are common and often appear frequently .
 There are several different versions of this item, with and without the paper clip well . The paper clip can be used to hold a paper clip .
 This is very hard to find in the original packaging, and it is likely that few were made . The original packaging was very difficult to find, and few were likely made .
 Inarco produced three-piece figurine dolls with a large Jackie head in a mourning veil accompanying smaller figurines of the two children, Caroline and John Jr.
 There were several different phonographic records, but they essentially provided the same material . The phonetic records were released in the 1970s .
 No one yet has published a complete discography of all of the long-playing records, 45 rpm singles, reel-to-reel tapes, and CDs that have been released .
 After her son’s death, Marguerite Oswald engaged in some commercial efforts .
 During the last fifty years, there have been hundreds of serial magazines with images of the Kennedys printed on the cover .
 Life magazine, perhaps more than any other, was especially smitten with placing the Kennedys on its covers . Life magazine was particularly fond of placing the couple on its cover .
 Henry Luce, the publisher of Life, and his wife had a relationship with Joseph and Rose Kennedy . This is perhaps because of the relationship Luce had with the Kennedy family .
 JFK, his wife, other family members, and even their children, appeared on the covers of Life nineteen times up until November 22, 1963 . JFK and his wife appear on the cover of Life 19 times .
 The Kennedys have appeared on the cover of Life over seventy times . Including memorial and other special issues, Life has appeared in Life over 70 times .
 Scores of specialty individual magazines were issued to cover the Kennedy presidency, his life and death, his funeral, and various aspects of the JFK assassination, Oswald’s life, and the Ruby trial .
 Dallas-based department store Nieman Marcus commissioned a very special limited edition of five hundred copies of JFK's undelivered Dallas Trade Mart speech .
 Umm Al Qiwain of the United Arab Emirates issued a series of eight stamps depicting scenes from Kennedy’s funeral . Many countries have issued commemorative JFK stamps in the years following the assassination .
 One of the more unusual commemorative coins was issued in Germany by Deutsche Numismatikin in various sizes in gold and silver . JFK being shot on the obverse and Ruby shooting Oswald on the reverse .
 For instance, ABC produced a two-disc long-playing record, November 22nd, 1963, for internal use by their staff . ABC produced the record for use by staff .
 Even TV Guide published a special issue on the television coverage of Kennedy’s assassination . TV Guide covered the events in a special special issue .
 Local newspapers imprinted their own names on these wire-service editions . Kansas City Star even printed their own dust jackets to cover the AP edition .
 Many newspapers also issued special pamphlets touting their own coverage . Just about every newspaper had a special pullout section .
 There were scores of scores of these types of publications, some of which were reprinted for anniversary editions . Some of these publications were reprinted in anniversary editions.
 Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis is the daughter of the late Princess of Monaco . Jacqueline Onassis was assassinated in 1968 . She was assassinated by President Kennedy Kennedy Kennedy III in 1963 .
 McNamara auctioned at Sotheby’s Auctions, Oct. 2012 . McNamara's estate will be auctioned in New York .
 Jacqueline Kennedy appeared in a newsreel to thank the nation for its outpouring of sympathy . On January 14, 1964, the film was released in movie theaters nationwide .
 In 1964, the trustees, hoping to raise funds for the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Library, launched a traveling exhibit . The exhibit was intended to raise money for the library .
 Hundreds of articles and numerous books were written after Jackie’s White House years . Jackie avoided the press and public comments .
 Galella's claim against the Secret Service agents’ aggressive response to his presence when he was near Jackie’s family was dismissed . Galella: ‘I’m not going to apologize to Jackie. I’ll never apologize to her. I want to apologize
 In 2010, HBO produced a documentary, Smash His Camera, on this paparazzo photographer . The titled borrowed from Jackie's own request to her Secret Service detail as to how to respond to the photographer's intrusive behavior .
 Senator Hubert H Humphrey perceived a political opportunity to ingratiate himself with President Johnson . Perhaps with the hope of securing the number-two spot on the Democratic ticket in 1964 .
 His first meeting with LBJ, along with other congressional leaders, occurred almost immediately after Johnson returned to his office in the Old Executive Office Building .
 As the widow of an American serviceman, Jackie Kennedy Onassis was entitled to be buried next to the president . She was buried alongside the president at the time of her death . The widow of a serviceman is entitled to a burial next to him .
 While ill with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, she decided that this would be her final resting place . She decided that she would be best-laid place .
 At this site in the cemetery, she is buried next to JFK, her unnamed stillborn daughter, and their infant Patrick .
 The Sixth Floor Museum provides a somber, thoughtful, and historical response to the JFK assassination . Much like Ford’s Theatre, where President Lincoln was shot, the museum is dedicated to Lincoln's legacy .
 Visit to Dealey Plaza itself is a very different experience . However, the visit to the site is very different from the tourist attraction .
 Historical Journal (reprinted numerous times, as a “a Dealey Plaza special edition” or a special anniversary edition) or a well-known conspiracy theorist lecturing on the Grassy Knoll .
 Robert Groden is a perennial vendor of books in Dealey Plaza . Groden has been there for more than 30 years .
 He has waged a legal battle against the city after being ticketed next to the pedestal on the Grassy Knoll where Abraham Zapruder filmed . He has been ticketed repeatedly next to a pedestal where the film was shot .
 Groden arrested in 2010 for selling his assassination literature at this location . Groden was arrested for selling the literature at the location in 2010 .
 Everyone saved newspapers and magazines that were printed in the hundreds of thousands, sometimes millions, sometimes the millions . Everyone saved papers and magazines printed in hundreds and thousands .
 The plane is on display in the Presidential Gallery at the National Museum of the United States Air Force in Dayton, Ohio .
 The wall tiles and contents of trauma room one are the property of the National Archives . The National Archives is storing the wall tiles in an underground storage facility in Lenexa, Kansas .
 JFK’s presidential limousine was rebuilt and is now on display at the Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan . JFK's presidential limo was rebuilt .
 In 2011, this auction house also sold to a private collector the ‘alleged’ ambulance that carried JFK’s coffin from Air Force One to the Bethesda Naval Hospital .
 The John F Kennedy Library and Museum stated that the car was a fake . The real vehicle had been donated to the institution in 1980 and then destroyed in 1986 .
 Odditorium in San Antonio, Texas, is the world's largest-and-most-interactive-ripleys-believe-it-or-not-Odditorium .
 It was offered by him in Las Vegas in 2008 through Guernsey’s Auctioneers and Brokers . It was not sold, failing to meet the reserve price of more than $1 million . Ruby wore the hat that he wore when he shot Oswald and some other artifacts were
 Jack and Jackie began to inscribe Christmas cards to be mailed upon their return from Dallas . Before they left for Dallas, Jack and Jacquie were inscribing Christmas cards .
 Many of these cards have a picture of a créche nativity display in the East Room of the White House . The cards were in the possession of JFK secretary Evelyn Lincoln and were later given to Kennedy collector Robert White .
 Several of these cards have been sold individually at auction and continue to emerge in the marketplace . The cards have also been auctioned off at auction .
 It is believed that Kennedy inscribed his last documented signature when he signed the November 22, 1963, edition of the Dallas Morning News for a maid .
 This newspaper was sold at Heritage Auctions in Dallas in 2009 for $38,837 . It was sold for more than $40,000 in 2009 .
 Heritage Auction Catalog: "20th Century Icons Autographs" Autographs will be auctioned in November .
 Many of the principals involved in Kennedy administration signed envelopes with the first-day issue November 22, 1964, postmark of the JFK commemorative stamp .
 Controversial commercially released items considered to be beyond bad taste . Controversial commercial items considered beyond 'bad taste' Controversial items considered 'beyond bad taste'
 Conspiracyland was sold by the "Patsy Brothers Company" in Dallas in 1999 . Conspiracyland is a board game that was sold in 1999 by the Patsy Brothers company in Dallas .
 In 2004, a computer game, JFK Reloaded, allowed participants to play the role of Oswald and shoot at Kennedy from the sixth-floor window in Dealey Plaza . The game was produced by Traffic Software in Scotland .
 The participant was then able to keep score on the accuracy and number of shots fired . The participant kept score on accuracy and the accuracy of the shots .
 For autopsy photographs, X-rays, and other similar material, permission must be obtained by JFK’s family through their representative, Paul Kirk .
 Since the JFK assassination, the basic conspiratorial motifs have remained the same . Since the assassination, conspirators have been trying to find a way to solve the mystery .
 Some works focus on single theories, while others weave or provide multiple conspiracy views of the assassination . Some of the theories have multiple theories .
 Entire books have focused on certain aspects of these recurring themes . Entire novels have been written about the themes of the book .
 Almost immediately after the assassination, U.S. government officials were concerned that there was a Soviet plot to kill the president . The assassination occurred in 1953 .
 Oswald's activities in the Soviet Union have been the primary subject of several works . Oswald’s activities in Soviet Union are the subject of numerous works .
 The right wing was a major suspect in having a hand in JFK's assassination . Because of the full page welcome mr. kennedy to dallas ad in the Dallas Morning News, as well as the wanted for treason .
 Many perceive the CIA to be the least cooperative agency with regard to the assassination . With many files still being withheld, this has been fertile ground for conspiracy theories .
 Though originally self-published in very rare signed and numbered limited spiral-bound editions, these works have been reprinted numerous times . The works were originally self published in limited limited spiral bound editions .
 President Kennedy was shot to death by a Secret Service agent in 1968 . Kennedy's widow says he was killed by a single bullet fired accidentally .
 The suit was dismissed on technical grounds, but the retired Secret Service agent settled with St. Louis County .
 There have been numerous Freedom of Information Act lawsuits and requests, producing thousands of additional documents .
 The essential findings and conclusions of the Warren Commission have stood the test of time and have not been contradicted . While there have been some inconsistencies and new documents have emerged, the essential findings have stood by time and haven't been contradicted.
 The initial FBI Investigation and multivolume report, December 9, 1963, was released in December 1963 . The initial report was published by the FBI in 1963 .
 Several congressional hearings and reports in the 1960s and 1970s on the preservation of evidence of the Warren Commission and on FBI oversight were held .
 Report of the Select Committee to Study Government Operations with Respect to Intelligence Activities in the United States in the U.S. (Sen. John McCain, D-Lieutenant Commander of the Armed Forces, testified before a Senate committee)
 There have been more than thirty freestanding bibliographies on JFK assassination books, pamphlets, and articles, no one source is complete . Many of the early works contained numerous errors .
 While there are several JFK assassination specialty collections being amassed, there is no institutional library whose collection comes even close to completeness . Also, unlike the Lincoln assassination, there are no institutional libraries with a complete collection of JFK memorabilia .
 Joesten became a prolific writer on the JFK assassination . He produced several additional books in German, French, and English, all published outside the United States .
 Immediately after the Warren Commission Report, thousands of conspiracy-inclined authors produced works, and bestsellers emerged in every decade and every generation .
 Weisberg also turned out to be a prolific writer on the JFK and Martin Luther King Jr. assassinations . He self-published more than ten works on the assassination and created many more unpublished manuscripts .
 Marguerite Oswald asked Lane to represent her son before the Warren Commission . Lane has been immersed in writing about the JFK assassination and similar subjects .
 He produced a documentary movie based on the book, along with a longplaying phonographic record . He also produced a long playing record .
 Assassination of a Head of State and cowrote the screenplay that was made into the movie, Executive Action . Executive Action is Executive Action, a movie about the assassination of a head of state .
 Lane created “The Citizens Commission on Inquiry” and was on the lecture circuit for decades . Lane was a prominent lecturer and author of the book "Citizens of Inquiry" Lane created the Citizens Commission of Inquiry .
 Lane represented James Earl Ray, the assassin of Martin Luther King Jr. Lane represented Earl Ray before the House Select Committee on Assassination . Lane represented Ray in the House of Representatives .
 Lane was the legal counsel to Jim Jones in Guyana when the People’s Temple mass suicide occurred in 1978 . Lane was also legal counsel for Jim Jones when he committed suicide in 1978 at the People's Temple .
 Representative Leo Ryan, visiting Jonestown, became the first congressman killed while conducting official business while in office . At the same time, Rep. Leo Ryan was killed in the same place .
 Mark Lane is only one of the many conspiracy theorists that have written several books on the assassination of JFK . Lane joins the ranks of individuals such as Robert B Cutler, Penn Jones Jr., Robert J Groden, and others .
 The pagination of this electronic edition does not match the edition from which it was created . Use the weekly Newsquiz to test your knowledge of stories you saw on CNN.com .
 The 12-Day Chase for Lincoln’s Killer and its sequel, Bloody Crimes: The Funeral of Abraham Lincoln and the Chase for Jefferson Davis, are all based on the book .
 Manhunt won an Edgar Award for the best nonfiction crime book of the year . The award-winning book won an award for best non-fiction crime .
 Swanson's other books include the bestselling classic Chasing Lincoln’s Killer, an adaptation of Manhunt for young readers, and Bloody Times .
 Their Trial and Execution, is an acclaimed photo history of the crime, the pursuit of the conspirators, and their fates . The trial and execution is a photo-based photo history .
 He was awarded a Historic Deerfield Fellowship in Early American History . He serves on the advisory council of the Ford’s Theatre Society .
 JamesLSwanson is the author of HarperCollins.com . Follow him on Twitter @LSWanson . Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite HarperCollins authors .
 You have the right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen . Use the free, non-transitable, self-published e-books to help with reading comprehension and vocabulary . At the bottom of the page, please submit a photo of the author and
 No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted, decompiled or decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or invented, without the express written