 He dealt with opponents with extreme harshness and while a few prospered under his regime, many Cubans were very poor . Many Cubans are very poor, many of them were poor .
 He was tolerant of communists and received the support of the Americans . He was not tolerant of communism and received support from Americans .
 Batista's sole support within Cuba came from the army which was equipped by the Americans . Batista’s sole support was from the Cuban army, which was armed by the US .
 Havana, Cuba, had been the play ground of the rich from America . For some years, Havana, the capital of Cuba, has been a play ground for the rich . Havana is now a tourist destination in Cuba .
 They would come to the island at the weekend to gamble – illegal in all parts of America except for Las Vegas - illegal in the U.S. except Las Vegas .
 Havana was considered more convenient for those living in the southern states of America . Havana was Cuba's most popular destination in the U.S.
 Large sums of money were spent but most was creamed off by Batista and his henchmen . Batista took advantage of the money he spent on the island .
 Some young Cubans reacted against Batista’s corruption and oppression . For all the money coming into Cuba, the poor remained very poor .
 Small group of rebels fled to the Sierra Mastra – a remote area of Cuba . First attempt to overthrow the government was a failure and they fled to a remote region .
 The poor were educated by the poor in their ways, according to CNN.com's John Sutter.com .
 Mao Tse Tung used the tactics of Mao Tung by actually helping out the poverty stricken peasants on their land . They used to help out the poor on their own land .
 These people had been used to abuse for years and here were young educated people actually helping them for free . These people were used to be abused for years, and here they were helping them free .
 By 1959, the rebels lead by Fidel Castro felt strong enough to overthrow the government of Batista . It was only a matter of time before the 'message' spread to other areas of Cuba .
 He then nationalised all American firms in Cuba so that their wealth would be invested in Cuba itself rather than leave the island and go to multi-nationals in America . The Cuban leader then nationalized all American companies in Cuba .
 Cuban exiles were treated by some Americans as heroes and brought with them stories that outraged the U.S. press . They were treated as heroes by some American press .
 This trade embargo would have bankrupted the island as her biggest money earner was exporting sugar to America . The island's biggest revenue earner would have been exporting sugar .
 There is little evidence that Castro or Cuba had any real intention of teaming up with communist Russia . Up to this time, there was little evidence .
 In 1960, Castro referred to himself as a socialist – not a communist . However, the trade embargo brought the two together as Russia stepped in to buy Cuba’s sugar and other exports . Russia also stepped in as Cuba's sugar exports were bought by Russia .
 The actions of America appear to have driven Castro into the support offered by Russia . Castro appears to have accepted the support of Russia in the past .
 J F Kennedy decided to give support to the anti-Castro Cubans who had gone to Florida . Now with a supporter of communism only 50 miles from Florida, the new American president – JF Kennedy – decided to support them . The new president decided to back the Cuban anti-
 With CIA funding, a group of armed Cuban exiles tried to land in Cuba at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 . Armed exiles landed in Cuba with the sole intention of overthrowing Castro government .
 Cubans land in Cuba without fuel and no maps of the island being issued . It proved a fiasco – jeeps landed without fuel; no maps were issued; Cuban exiles fired on Cuban exile .
 Castro: "To Castro, this episode showed him where America stood in relations to Cuba" Castro says the episode showed how U.S. stood in Cuba's relations with Cuba .
 Castro started to look for a closer relationship with Russia who could offer her protection . Castro started looking for a close relationship with the country's closest ally . Castro was forced to turn to Russia for protection .
 Anti-Castro Cuban refugees reported to the CIA that there was a build-up of Russian bases in Cuba . On October 16th 1962, a U2 spy plane took high level photographs over Cuba and revealed what was obviously a base for missiles .
 These were identified as being inter-mediate range missiles capable of carrying a nuclear payload . These were later identified as  intermediate range missiles capable of carrying a nuke payment .
 The 16 to 32 missiles identified could kill 80 million Americans as they had a range of 2000 miles with a flight time of just 17 minutes . On October 17th 1962 the CIA reported to the president that the missiles could kill more than 80 million .
 USA Intelligence reported that over 20 Russian ships were heading for Cuba with crates on board that obviously contained more missiles . USA Intelligence said over 20 ships were headed for Cuba .
 They were carried on deck in full view of U.S. observer planes . They were not difficult to detect as they were carrying on deck .
 On October 27th, a U2 was shot down by a Russian missile and the pilot killed . The pilot was killed by the missile . The incident was made worse when a Russian plane was also shot down .
 Russia sent 42 medium range missiles and 24 intermediate range missiles to Cuba . The missiles had a capability of 3500 miles . Russian troops and technicians accompanied the missiles .
 President Obama could do nothing and ignore the missiles . He had essentially five choices: ignore missiles, ignore missiles and ignore missiles .
 This would have been political suicide and if the Russians had seen this as weakness on his part, they could have taken advantage of it . This would be political suicide for the Russian president, says David Cameron .
 This could lead to heavy U.S. casualties and that would be politically damaging, says CNN's John Sutter .
 It would almost certainly involve Russian casualties which could escalate the conflict . It would be almost certainly involving Russian casualties .
 The offending missile bases were in remote areas and most were well inland . The American chiefs-of-staff were not convinced that it would be successful either .
 The Russians refused to recognise the existence of the missiles at the United Nations emergency meeting on the matter . However, the Russians were highly unlikely to listen to a 'polite' request .
 This would still leave missiles on Cuba but the negotiations would continue in the background while publically Kennedy would be seen to be doing something specific . The negotiations would still be ongoing but the talks would continue to the background .
 Khruschev, the Russian leader, sent Kennedy two letters both of which sent conflicting messages . Following American protests, Kennedy wrote two letters to the Soviet Union . The letters were sent to the White House by Kennedy .
 USSR was to remove its missiles from Cuba and USA was to end Cuba`s quarantine and to give out a promise not to invade Cuba . USA was also to end its quarantine and give a promise to not invade Cuba. USSR to remove missiles and end Cuba’s quarantine . USA
 If the USSR did not respond by October 29th, USA would launch a military invasion of Cuba . The USSR would not respond to the U.S. threat of invasion . The US would invade Cuba if it failed to respond .
 On October 28th, Khruschev replied that the USSR would remove the missiles . On October 29th, he said that the missiles would be removed from the USSR .
 The end result of the crisis was seen as a huge success for Kennedy . It contributed to the downfall of Khrushchev in Russia . The crisis saw the end of the Soviet Union as a success in the world .
 The one positive thing to come out of the crisis was the creation of a hot-line between Moscow and Washington . The line allows for easier communication between the two nations leaders at a time of crisis .
 This is one of the few examples of the Cold War where the two principle countries actually got involved themselves against each other . This is a rare example where the U.S. and Russia got involved .
 Up to 1962, other nations fought out the Cold War on their behalf as each knew that a conflict between the two would have the potential to be horrific . The Cold War ended in 1962 with the U.S. leading the Soviet Union in the lead .
 The lessons learned from Cuba ensured that neither would push each other to the brink again and that the ‘rules of the Cold War would be adhered to . The lessons were learned from the lessons from Cuba .
 This was a popular treaty in America and a sign that something positive had come out of the Cuban Crisis – that of a greater respect for each other . The treaty was a sign of respect for the U.S. and Cuba .
 Fidel Castro was born in 1926 in Biran, Cuba . He has been leader of Cuba since 1959 . Castro is the Cuban leader of the Cuban government .