 On 16 October 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviet Union was building bases in Cuba for ballistic missiles that could destroy major U.S. cities .
 In days that followed, U.S. officials focused on strategies for removing Soviet missiles, on Soviet motives, and on Soviet reaction .
 Cuba was the locus of this most dramatic superpower confrontation, but Cuban perceptions, motives, and reactions were largely ignored . Cuba was largely ignored by the U.S. in the 1980s and 1990s .
 Analyses of the missile crisis have tended to frame it as a US-Soviet standoff, in which each of these two nuclear powers had to calculate its strategy principally in terms of the other .
 Cuba has been accorded little regard as a meaningful actor in the crisis . Cuba has not been seen as a significant role in the U.S. crisis .
 An earlier version of this article was presented at the 1989 Annual Meeting of the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations . It is considered to have had an impact on American foreign relations .
 Douglas Dillon, Humphrey Johnson and James A Nathan are the anonymous referees of the journal of Latin American Studies . Douglas Dillon is the author of the study . Humphrey . Johnson and Humphrey. Nathan are also anonymous referees .
 John F Kennedy in the White House (Boston, 1965), ch.-1; R Hilsman, To Move a Nation , chs.-16. John F. Kennedy in Boston, ch-1; ch-2; chs-3: "To Move A Nation"
 More often, it is seen as an outpost of the Soviet Union with little autonomy . More frequently, it has been seen as a Soviet outpost of Russia .
 Cuba's behaviour and perspective during the missile crisis generally have been treated as peripheral to an understanding of any important issues . As a consequence, Cuba's behavior and perspective on missile crisis has been ignored by the US .
 New information challenges the prevailing view about Cuba's importance in Cuba . New information about the missile crisis has come to light now which challenges the view .
 It indicates that Cuba was very much a part of the Cuban missile crisis . It suggests that our ability to learn from the crisis is fundamentally impaired without a full appreciation of the way Cuba affected the history .
 If the U.S. had not been bent on liquidating the Cuban revolution there would not have been an October crisis . Before 22 October 1962, the United States was bent on Liquidating Cuba .
 This was first demonstrated with economic aggression and then with the organization of subversive forces against Cuba, the Bay of Pigs invasion . This was demonstrated by economic aggression, then by organization of subverted forces .
 The Cuban government set up strategic missiles in Cuba . And this thought determined the setting up of strategic missiles, he says .
 Edited transcripts and analyses of the first two conferences can be found in Blight and Welch, On the Brink . Transcripts and analyses are available for the first and second conferences .
 The first included nearly all the living members of the ExComm (Executive Committee of the National Security Council, formed by President Kennedy on 16 Oct.62) and the second included many of these men .
 Soviet leaders seem to have shared the Cuban judgement, though it is not clear if the Soviets arrived at this view independently or largely as a result of Cuban intelligence and analyses .
 This belief framed the Cuban interpretation of each hostile U.S. action during the eighteen months after the Bay of Pigs . It led inexorably to the conclusion that an invasion was coming. This belief was the belief .
 Castro received a report from Aleksei I Adzhubei, the editor of I^yestia and Premier Nikita Khrushchev's son-in-law, about an interview with President Kennedy . Castro received the report shortly after .
 The Soviet editor reportedly derived a strong impression from the interview that an invasion was being planned . The interview was reportedly made by a Soviet editor .
 Miro Cardona, head of the Cuban Revolutionary Council, told journalists that President Kennedy had indicated to him in a White House meeting that the Administration wanted to invade Cuba with an exile army headed by Cardona .
 Soviet leaders relied on several sources of intelligence to develop their analysis of an impending U.S. invasion .
 While the Soviet conclusion seems to have coincided with the Cuban assessment, it is not clear how much influence the Cuban view had .
 Alfred MacAdam, 185, claims that Adzhubei gave Castro the report in person . MacAdam claims that the report was given to Castro in person by Adzubei .
 Castro received information from a copy of a report submitted to Khrushchev that was sent to Havana . Matthews, Revolution in Cuba, 208, writes that Castro received Adzhubei's information .
 Dinerstein: Making of the Missile Crisis, 141 . Cardona: The crisis was a 'human error' Cardona says .
 The first, Lantphibex 1—62, involved a marine assault using the island of Vieques off the coast of Puerto Rico . The first of two such assaults took place in the past two years .
 The second, called QUICK KICK, was a massive set of naval manoeuvres with 79 ships and more than 40,000 troops off the southeastern U.S. coast .
 The U.S. attempted to extend its economic embargo by threatening to cut off aid to countries that traded with Cuba . Meanwhile, the United States attempted to end the embargo by pressuring allies to end commercial ties with the island .
 A recently declassified progress report about the economic campaign against Cuba confirmed that 'diplomatic means were used to frustrate Cuban trade negotiations in Israel, Jordan, Iran, Greece, and possibly Japan' These activities were interpreted by Cuban officials as part of a well developed plan to destabilise
 In fact, the efforts were coordinated by an interagency working group chaired by a State Department representative .
 Cuban unease was reinforced by the campaign that may have been the most threatening portent of an invasion . The campaign may be the most ominous portent to an invasion of Cuba . The Cuban government has not responded to the allegations .
 The target date for the revolt was set as October 1962, when the missile crisis did occur . In an incredible historical irony, the target date was October 1962 .
 Planning for the revolt began before either the Cubans or Soviets ever discussed missiles . The revolt was planned before the Soviets or Cubans discussed missiles, but it was never discussed .
 Operation Mongoose was the largest operation that the CIA had ever undertaken . Operation 'Mongoose' was the biggest operation ever undertaken by the CIA . The operation was the CIA's largest ever .
 Four hundred agents, and many more ' assets' and operatives, were assigned the task of destroying the Cuban government . The Cuban government was overthrown by the Soviet Union in 1953 .
 Run out of headquarters in Miami, Miami, it deployed paid Cuban exiles on raids into Cuba from South Florida, Puerto Rico and Central America . The operation is based in Miami and Puerto Rico .
 By the end of July 1962 the CIA claimed to have infiltrated 11 teams into Cuba to support' guerrilla forces' Their efforts were supported by clandestine radio broadcasts to Cuba on a station called Radio Americas .
 The Cubans seem to have viewed the exile attacks as integrally coupled to the several attempts that were made during this period to assassinate Castro . The exile attacks were seen as a result of several attempts to kill Castro .
 Sergo Mikoyan explained the logical link in 1988, by arguing that there would have been no reason to assassinate Castro only to have him replaced by Che Guevara .
 The logic was that Castro's death would be followed by an invasion of U.S. troops . The logic would be that the death of Castro would lead to the invasion of United States troops .
 Cuban officials did not believe that the exiles themselves would overthrow the Cuban government, because Cuba was far better armed in 1962 than it had been in April 1961 . Castro underlined that fact with an interview in Pravda in January 1962 .
 There is no information yet available about Cuban knowledge of the overall Mongoose plan itself .
 Cuban leaders generally anticipated an invasion, that Mongoose activities were a significant factor in shaping this assessment . Events in early 1962 almost certainly stimulated the Cuban decision in May to accept Soviet ballistic missiles on the island .
 Cuban fears of a U.S. invasion may have been related to what now appear to be real threats posed by the United States . Cuban fears may have stemmed from fears of an invasion in the weeks leading up to the discovery of missiles .
 'Before the Missiles of October', Tie Boston Phoenix, 8 April 1988 . Also see his 'Before and after' interview with the Boston Phoenix Phoenix .
 Other factors may have led the Cubans to believe an invasion was imminent before the end of 1962 . However, other factors may also have led to an invasion being imminent .
 Defence Department publicity about large scale military exercises off the coast of Puerto Rico planned for October .
 Named Philbriglex-62, it included an 'invasion' of Vieques in a mock overthrow of a leader named Ortsac, or 'Castro' in reverse . The 'Invasion' included an invasion in an attempt to overthrow the leader of a 'Cast
 On 24 August, the emigre terrorist group, Alpha 66, strafed a hotel near Havana and killed several Soviet technicians and Cubans . Alpha 66 was a terrorist group that bombed a hotel in Havana, Cuba, killing several .
 He thereby left the impression that he would be for it in the near future, he said . He said he was for it .
 Cuban officials were probably sensitive to the announcement, because they had been troubled when the U.S. began drafting Cuban exiles in late 1961 .
 It has reproduced, after 18 months, the outward conditions that preceded the Bay of Pigs invasion . The US has reproduced the outward . conditions that followed the invasion of Cuba .
 T h e exercises began on 21 October . They were in reality no longer exercises but prepositioning for a possible invasion . The exercises began in October .
 There are now many versions of why and how Cuba came to have Soviet missiles . There are many theories as to how Cuba got to have missiles .
 A consensus has emerged that the idea originated with the Soviets, and that it was accepted by the Cubans as an act of' socialist solidarity' and as a means of deterring a United States invasion .
 There are varying accounts that describe some of the key actions taken by Cuba before 22 October, and the decisions made by the Cuban leadership . There are also varying accounts .
 There is little information about Cuban perceptions of the way in which the U.S. officials viewed Cuba's behaviour . However, there are little information on Cuban perceptions .
 It may be that Cuban leaders did not care about what the United States perceived . But they would have needed to familiarise themselves with the attitudes of U.S. leaders, he says .
 We do not know, for example, how Cuban officials imagined the United States would react to the Second Declaration of Havana . We don't know how Cuba imagined the U.S. reaction to the Declaration .
 Castro's 1962 speech provided the basis for a policy of supporting armed struggle in Latin America . Castro asserted, 'The duty of every revolutionary is to make the revolution', he said .
 It may have been that the Cuban leaders surmised that their behaviour did not matter to the United States anymore, that U.S. policy was fixed on a course of overthrowing the Cuban government regardless of what it did .
 They seem not to have considered that U.S. policy might be accelerated by their actions and declarations . They seemed not to consider that United States policy may be accelerated .
 The Cubans may have calculated that the U.S. would accept their presence in Cuba with equanimity . The Soviets had sent them elsewhere without much reaction, and the Cubans did so .
 Cuban leaders believed that these new weapons would deter a U.S. invasion . Presumably they believed that they would deter an invasion .
 The prevailing view is that neither the Cubans nor Soviets gave much thought to the U.S. reaction, and had no contingency plan for it . Neither country had much thought about the United States reaction .
 President Kennedy's 22 October revelation about the missiles . The Cubans were not as complacent about the secret as the Soviets .
 Castro's 26 July speech, in which he said that Cuban weapons would be able to cause untold casualties in the United States, and Dorticos's 8 October UN speech suggest that they assumed the U.S. would or did know about the missiles .
 Military preparations appear to have been made only to counter the feared U.S. invasion that Cuban leaders had seen coming many months earlier . Yet military preparations were only made to counter a feared United States invasion that had been seen coming .
 There is no evidence that they connected the seeming invasion plans to their own introduction of ballistic missiles . No evidence that the apparent invasion plans were connected with their own missile introduction .
 Cuban leaders may have assumed that the U.S. would accept the presence of missiles once they were operational . The Soviets had accepted United States missiles in Turkey, as the Soviets did .
 President Kennedy's two September warnings against the introduction of offensive capabilities in Cuba were misinterpreted . Yet if this were the case, it would be important to know why .
 While we have an obscure picture of Cuban perceptions of U.S. views about Cuban behaviour, our portrait of Cuba's perception about Soviet views is even fainter . We have a faint portrait of Cuban views of the United States .
 Relations between the two countries were strained in the early part of 1962 . Soviet military aid was provided at a reduced level until June . We do know that relations were strained .
 One authoritative Soviet view of President Kennedy's statements by Anatoly Gromyko focused only on aspects of bellicosity in what Kennedy said, and ignored mention of the implicit warning against placing ballistic missiles or combat troops in Cuba .
 Russia may have viewed the missiles as an offer they could not refuse on pain of straining the relationship even further . On the other hand, they may have seen the offer as a threat to further strain relations .
 Cubans wanted to be included under the Soviet nuclear umbrella in 1962 . They were seeking a way to sharpen Khrushchev's vague i960 threat to let missiles fly .
 They may have seen emplacement of the missiles as an acceptable alternative to joining the Warsaw Pact . The missiles may have been emplaced in the Soviet Union's territory .
 The defence of Cuba has been included as a second Cuban motive . Since then, the defence of the country has been added to the list of reasons for the country's defence .
 Questions arise, though, as to what 'strengthening the socialist camp' meant . Questions arise over what it meant .
 Cuban leaders perceived the missiles as a strategic deterrent that would enable the Soviet Union to counter a potential U.S. first strike .
 The defence of one important country in the socialist camp would thereby keep all socialist countries safer . In this sense, the defence of an important socialist country would keep it safer .
 We do not know what Cuba's assessment was of the likelihood of a U.S. first strike against the Soviet Union, or whether he even made such an assessment . But we do know what Cuban officials thought of the chances of a strike .
 Cuban-based weapons might have enabled Khrushchev to bargain more effectively for socialist gains elsewhere . Castro understood the missiles as part of the US-Soviet equation, it is safe to assume .
 For Cuba to stand up to the United States would weaken the U.S. image as an invincible power . In a zero-sum world the missiles would have strengthened the nonwestern camp, he says . In addition, for Cuba .
 Castro is likely to have believed that if an avowedly socialist country were able to resist U.S. attacks, then it would encourage similar resistance elsewhere . Castro is believed to have hoped that if a socialist country could resist attacks on the United States, it would inspire similar resistance .
 This construction would have been consistent with the Second Declaration of Havana, Havana .
 The Soviet Union did not endorse Cuba's enthusiasm for Third World revolution, especially in Latin America . However, the Soviet Union didn't endorse the Cuban revolution .
 There is also uncertainty about the way Cuban leaders calculated the missiles would contribute to the defence of Cuba . The missiles are also uncertain about how they will contribute to Cuba's defence .
 Liquid propelled and requiring eight hours to fuel and arm with a nuclear warhead, they would have been of little use in responding to a nuclear attack, and of uncertain use in response to a conventional one . Liquid propelled by a liquid propelled missile, they were much more likely to be used
 As Barton Bernstein observed about the United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey, it would be more likely that they 'would draw, not deter, an attack'48 Cuban officials may have understood this because Castro remarked in 1974 that Cuba had an obligation in effect to make itself as much of a target
 From their viewpoint, missiles were better still, he suggested, and were a reasonable means of defence . He suggested missiles could be used as missiles, but missiles were not needed .
 The estimate of time necessary to prepare a missile for firing was made by Soviet military officials at the 1989 Moscow 49 conference .
 There is the possibility that Cuban leaders did expect the missiles might be used . Still, there is a possibility that they did expect missiles might have been used .
 They may have anticipated that a direct invasion by US forces would trigger the missiles . The missiles could have been triggered by a direct US invasion of Syria .
 Castro has said he drew little distinction between a conventional assault on Cuba and a nuclear retaliation . A conventional attack would cost Cuba millions of lives and would affect Cuban society much the way a nuclear attack would ravage the United States .
 We know the stated motives for Cuba's decision, but we do not have a precise understanding of what it means . Thus, while we know what motives for the Cuba decision, we don't know what the statements mean . We do not know what Cuba's stated motives are .
 Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, Che Gue-Gue-ara, Bias Roca, Osvaldo Dorticos, and Aragones . Fidel Castro was assassinated at the age of 50 .
 The six formed the Secretariat of the Integrated Revolutionary Organisations , the ruling party at the time . The six were the six members of the Revolutionary Party .
 A trip to Moscow by Raul Castro in July served to develop details of the plan . During those two weeks a formal agreement was drafted and initialled .
 Franqui's list deletes Aragones and Bias Roca, and includes Ramiro Valdes . Four of the four on his list are the same as on Aragone's, but Franquis' list is deleted .
 It's uncertain how the July draft agreement refined the initial Soviet-Cuban understanding . Yet it is uncertain how it refined the agreement was reached .
 Cuba requested military equipment other than ballistic missiles be provided in a way that enabled them to be under Cuban control . For example, we do not know whether Cuba requested that military equipment be provided that enabled it to be controlled .
 The best evidence indicates that the Soviets controlled the surface-to-air missiles throughout the crisis, because the Cubans had not been sufficiently trained at the time to use them .
 Cuban pilots had been trained to fly the IL-28S, but Cuba never took full possession of the bombers . Cuban pilots were trained to pilot the bombers, but never flew them .
 IL-28S were considered to be virtually obsolete as an offensive weapon, but would have been useful in defending Cuba against commando raids or in attacking commando bases .
 By the end of October there were more than 40,000 Soviet military personnel on the island . About half of them were troops, about half were troops .
 We don't know if the Cubans requested this large number, whether they sought even more, or how they considered the troops would be used . We do not know if they sought more or if they wanted even more .
 Such a significant Soviet military contingent in itself would likely have prompted a U.S. attack, because it would have made Cuba a major Soviet base . Cuba would have been a major base for the Soviets .
 With such a large contingent, the Soviet stakes in a U.S. attack would also have been enormous . The Soviet stakes would also be enormous, the author says .
 Khrushchev might not have survived the ensuing humiliation . Were the Soviet troops overrun by U.S. forces, Premier Khrushche would have survived .
 Che Guevara and Aragones travelled to Moscow on 27 August to visit the Che Cheyar family . The couple's visit to Moscow was the first time they had been to Russia .
 42 bombers were shipped to Cuba, and 11 were completely assembled and two were partially assembled when Cuba agreed to return them on 20 Nov. Cuba returned the bombers to Cuba .
 Castro noted on 19 November 1962, that 'owing to their limited speed and low flight ceiling, they are antiquated equipment in relation to modern means of anti-aircraft defence', Office of Public Information, United Nations, 'Text of Communication dated 19 Nov. 1962 from Prime Minister Fidel
 Sergo Mikoyan said in an interview on 30 January 1989 that none of the nuclear warheads on the island could have been refitted as bombs for the IL-28S . No nuclear bombs were delivered to Cuba .
 Aragones asserted in 1989 that he sought to make the agreement public immediately . Aragone said he sought in 1989 to make it public immediately.
 The Cubans reasoned that an announcement about the missiles would gain them more security than the secret installation of offensive weapons . The Cuban government decided to make the announcement to the public .
 Former White House official Theodore Sorensen reflected at the 1989 Moscow meeting that it would have been more difficult for the U.S. to compel withdrawal of the missiles had the agreement been made public . The situation would have paralleled United .
 Cuban officials were eager in August 1962 to secure a public defence link to the Soviet Union . The Cuban government was eager to secure the link between the two countries .
 A public agreement would have had a deterrent effect, similar to membership in the Warsaw Pact, by making an attack on Cuba equivalent to an attack against the Soviet Union . From their perspective, a public agreement in itself would have been a deterrent, like a Warsaw Pact membership .
 Cuba did not take Soviet protection for granted, and it sought to manoeuvre the Soviet Union into an embrace at the same time Cuba sought to protect itself from the U.S. The Cuban government did not want to rely on Soviet protection .
 Such an alliance was precisely what the Soviets had resisted, because of the difficulties that would be entailed in sustaining a conflict with the U.S. so far from the Soviet Union . The Soviets resisted such an alliance .
 Khrushchev refused to make the agreement public . He proposed to announce the accord in November, once the missiles were operational . The agreement was never made public .
 The notion that Cuba had little impact on events during the height of the crisis may have been the most serious oversight in earlier studies . While the review of the period before 22 October already has invalidated the metaphor, the review already invalidates that .
 T h e agreement, which was to be a five-year renewable pact, allegedly stipulated that the Soviets had n o right of sovereign immunity over the missile bases .
 Franqui contends that the land o n which the missiles were based became Soviet property . But he says it was Soviet property, and the missiles are now owned by the U.S. The missiles were launched in the 1960s .
 The Cuban army chief of staff recalled in 1989 that the Cuban leaders anticipated there would be massive U.S. bombing with an invasion . They had ordered the erection of ramparts and the digging of trenches, he said .
 This may be due to the sense that the danger to Cuba this time was from a direct U.S. attack, not from subversive forces . This may have been due to a sense that this time's attack was from the United States .
 Sergo Mikoyan remarked in an interview after the 1989 conference that he found it' incredible that the Cubans and Soviets in Cuba were ready to die to the last man' during the crisis in Cuba .
 There appears to be an atmosphere of defiance and toughness throughout the country, in part stimulated by the Cuban media . Indeed, there appears to have been a defiance and tough atmosphere in Cuba .
 The US expectation was that the main fighting would have been over in ten days, and that U.S. forces would have sustained 18,484 casualties .
 In Moscow in 1989, Cuban Political Bureau member Jorge Risquet argued that major guerilla warfare would have gone on for years, and del Valle estimated that there would have been 100,000 civilian and military casualties in the short term .
 If that were the case, it is conceivable that the war against Cuba might have escalated to a nuclear level in response to a range of pressures on both the Kennedy Administration and the Soviet leaders .
 Castro's order on 27 October to open fire on any hostile aircraft in Cuban airspace is an indication of the ferocity of the Cuban position . Castro ordered the Cuban government to shoot down any hostile planes .
 A Soviet officer may have been responding to Castro's general command instead of following instructions from Moscow to avoid provocations . That morning a Soviet officer fired a SAM that downed a U-2 surveillance aircraft .
 37 mm Cuban guns hit a low flying F8U-1P plane that was on a reconnaissance mission . The F8P plane was hit by 37mm Cuban guns at the height of the crisis .
 Had the F8U-1P been unable to return to base, it is likely that the threatened U.S. attacks would have commenced .
 There already was pressure on President Kennedy from several of his advisers and from the Joint Chiefs of Staff to launch an attack . President Kennedy already was under pressure from several advisers .
 At the Moscow conference del Valle's estimate was translated as '800,000' and this was accepted by US participants as credible . US participants accepted that there were 40,000 Soviet military personnel in Cuba .
 During the crisis, the United States estimate of Soviet military strength on the island ranged from 10,000 to 16,000 . The U.S. estimates of Soviet strength in the island range from 10-16,000-to-10,000 troops .
 See Adela Estrada Juarez, 'The General Who Gave the Order to Fire', Granma Weekly Review, 23 April 1989, 8.30 April 1989 .
 The CINCLANT Account reported that the guns were 5 7 mm, and that no low level plane had been hit . No low-level plane was hit .
 By Saturday the 27th, there was a clear majority in the ExComm in favor of taking military action . By Saturday, the majority of ExComm members had agreed to take action .
 Alekseev recounts that there were daily communications between Castro and Khrushchev from 23 to 27 October . He recounts that daily communications were made between the two leaders .
 Castro encouraged the Soviets to remain firm in keeping the missiles in Cuba . Castro, he recalls, encouraged the Soviet Union to keep the missiles there .
 It's not clear whether the Cubans were informed fully abut Soviet deliberations and intentions . It's unclear whether the Soviets may have misinformed them intentionally or inadvertently . The Cubans may have been misled by the Soviets .
 Castro seems to have interpreted this answer to mean that all of the missiles were in Cuba, all were operational, and that each missile was configured with a warhead ready to be fired .
 It is not clear what he understood by 'all' the missiles to mean at the time of the incident .
 By 22 October, 42 missiles had arrived in Cuba; eighty had been planned for delivery . The Cuban government had planned to deliver eighty missiles .
 All 42 missiles were 'medium range' ballistic missiles, with a range of 1,020 miles . All 42 were medium-range ballistic missiles with a 'medium-range' range .
 Six undelivered missiles were also SS-4S, and 32 were 'intermediate range' missiles, with a range of 2,200 miles . The missiles were delivered to the U.S. in 2007 .
 Soviet participants at the 1989 Moscow conference said that the 20 warheads allegedly on the island were at some distance from the missiles . Participants said that it would have required eight hours to fuel and prepare a missile for firing .
 By 24 October only nine missiles reportedly were in place and fully assembled . Only nine missiles were reportedly assembled by 24 October .
 McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara argued that the likely response to a continued stalemate would have been a 'turning of the screw'
 Alekseev, 'Karibskii krizis', 82 . Confirmation of this comes indirectly from Aleksev, who wrote about the crisis in 1982 .
 In ' Karibskii krizis', he claims that all 42 missiles and warheads for them were in place . In 'Karibskis' he claims to have 42 missiles, warheads and missiles for them . He also claims to be in possession of 42 weapons and warheads .
 In an interview on 28 January 1989 he said that Castro reviewed the manuscript of his article prior to publication, and had corrected any errors of fact . Castro said in an interview in January 1989 that Castro had reviewed his article before publication .
 Castro believed even until recently that all the missiles and warheads were on the island . Presumably, then, Castro believed that until recently, all of the missiles were in the country's arsenal .
 Castro sent the most publicised (though not yet public) cable on 26 October by Castro . Castro has been accused of using the cable as a way to communicate with the U.S.
 Khrushchev's son allegedly said Castro called upon his father in that cable to fire missiles . Sergei Khrushchevsky's son, Sergei, allegedly said that Castro had called on his father to fire the missiles .
 He has said this version was a misinterpretation by those to whom he told the story . But he also has said that this version of the story was misinterpreted by those who he told them .
 It may be that Castro was highly agitated, fearing an imminent invasion, though that would contrast with several reports about his general calmness . The cable may have indicated Castro was agitated .
 Khrushchev may have reported his assessment that an invasion was imminent . He may have interpreted this in an extreme manner . The Soviet leader may merely have reported an invasion imminent, he may have been overly excited .
 The cable seems to have contributed to the Soviet leader's calculation that a speedy termination of the crisis was essential to avoid a major conflagration . Whatever the case, the cable seemed to contribute to his calculation .
 In short, it is certain that Cuba was more than a passive stage during the crisis . Cuba was not a passive state during the Cuban crisis, it has been said .
 Our knowledge of Cuban behaviour, intentions and assessments during the height of the crisis remain spotty . However, our knowledge of Cuba's behaviour and intentions during the crisis remains spotty.
 Cuban leaders understood that President Kennedy was using the press to send signals of United States intentions, in effect, to communicate ultimatums indirectly . President Kennedy used the press as a way of communicating ultimatum to Cuba .
 The U.S. did not know what the Cubans expected the use of anti-aircraft in Cuba . The Cuban government did not expect the United States to react to the use .
 By 27 October US decisions were firm about invading Cuba . They may have judged that by 27 October U.S. decision was firm about invasion .
 The anti-aircraft would not have precipitated U.S. action, in their view, but would merely have served to protect Cuba . Thus the anti-plane attack would have not precipitated United States action, they said .
 Low-level reconnaissance planes are often used just prior to an invasion for the purpose of establishing precise targets . Low level reconnaissance planes often used in advance of an invasion .
 Sergo Mikoyan affirms that Alekseev was the principal one . We also do not know whether Ambassador Aleksoev was a channel of communication between Cuba and the Soviet Union .
 Alekseev claimed to have helped draft the cable, and that n o such demand was in it . At the 1989 conference, he claimed to be the man who drafted it .
 Franqui reports that Cuban uncertainty about a U.S. invasion increased tension . He claims that this led Castro to fire the Soviet S A M missile that b r o u g h t d o w n the U-2 .
 He locates the firing in western Cuba, hundreds of miles from the actual SAM missile site in Oriente Province . That claim now is accorded little credence, in part because of the location of the missile site .
 As apocryphal story, it may suggest why Castro initiated the use of anti-aircraft guns . It may suggest that the story may have been true .
 This nomenclature is used to signify that the U.S. and Soviet Union were on the brink of nuclear catastrophe in October . It was only one of several crises that took on catastrophic proportions for the Cubans .
 In reality, the crisis did not end on 28 October for either the U.S. or the Soviet Union . The crisis didn't end for either of the two countries, but it did end in reality .
 The Kennedy-Khrushchev agreements had to be implemented and Cuba became very much a part of that process . Cuba was very much part of the process, and Cuba was a key part of it .
 Until 20 November, the United States Strategic Air Command remained on alert at Defence Condition 2 . Other forces were held at DefCon 3 and DefCon 2 . The naval quarantine was maintained in place .
 Several incidents before 28 October might have led to an escalating exchange, so too too the situation until 20 November remained very dangerous . Just as any of several incidents before that might have occurred, the situation before 20 November remains very dangerous.
 The U.S. asserted that the Kennedy—Khrushchev agreement required on-sight UN inspection in Cuba to assure that the offensive weapons were being dismantled and returned to the Soviet Union . The United States said that the agreement required an inspection of Cuba .
 The IL-28S were Cuban property, given to Cuba by the Soviet Union, Cuba says . Cuba says it would not permit inspection on its soil .
 Castro asserted that the Soviet Union had no authority to negotiate with the U.S. about inspection or about the return of the bombers . Castro: The Soviet Union did not have the right to negotiate .
 Castro demands U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba be verified be verified . Yet there was no equivalent demand, Castro told U. Thant, that the United States pledged not to invasion Cuba .
 Castro reportedly said the U.S. would not give up their intention of launching another aggression . Castro said the United States would 'not give up' their intention to launch another aggression, Castro said .
 Cuban negotiations with Mikoyan led the Soviets to back down on their initial willingness to remove all 40,000 troops . He declared that 'the danger of war would renew itself'
 Apparently at Cuban insistence, the Soviets agreed to maintain 3,000 troops in Cuba . The Soviet Union agreed to remain in Cuba at the end of the Cold War .
 Castro was furious about the KennedyKhrushchev agreements, says Castro . Castro was angry at the Kennedy administration's decision to hand over power to the Soviets .
 Castro's speech included a transcription of the 30 October meeting with U Thant . Castro spoke at a meeting with Thant at the end of October 30 .
 In his notes, U T h a n t said that the remarks were those of Castro, n o t Dorticos . Castro, who was Castro, said to have been Castro's spokesman .
 Cuban troops surrounded ballistic missile sites from 28 October to 3 November, which would suggest that they were prepared to fight to prevent the removal of missiles .
 When Anastas Mikoyan arrived in Havana on 2 November, Castro grudgingly met him at the airport, but then did not meet with him again for nearly a week . Castro did not speak to Mikoyans again for almost a week before he met him again .
 Castro 'disappeared' for days at a time, or allegedly came to an agreement one evening only to renege on it the next day . Castro allegedly reneged on a deal only to be re-negotiated the night before .
 The graphic stories of Castro's anger have tended to enshrine a conventional wisdom that his response to the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreements was rooted primarily in personal pique . Castro was angered by the Kennedy and Khrushchev agreements, but his anger was not personal, it was
 At the 1989 Moscow conference, Cuban participants acknowledged that the necessity 'of time' made the lack of consultation understandable . At the same time, the necessity of time was understandable .
 Castro asserted in a letter to U Thant that despite the removal of the missiles, United States officials 'do not consider themselves bound by any promise'100 Indeed, as early as November 1962, the United States began to back away from the 27 October pledge contained in President Kennedy's letter
 Raymond Garthoff reports that the U.S. leader would not give the Soviets firm assurances of no invasion, because on-sight inspection in Cuba and safeguards with respect to future military ties had not been met . It is unclear whether Cuban officials based their distrust of the United States on
 Castro's sense at the time was that the bargain was struck too readily, without adequate assurances . Castro was concerned that the U.S. would take advantage of loopholes to undermine Cuban security .
 The IL-28S was included in the demand for removal of offensive weapons . The Komar patrol boats were on the list Ambassador Adlai Stevenson presented to Anastas Mikoyan .
 Mongoose activities had been suspended on 30 October . Mongoose's action was supposedly unauthorised, because Mongoose had suspended its activities . Its action was supposed to be an act of madness .
 Apparently the group had been dispatched to Cuba before the official suspension of activities, and could not be recalled . The group was dispatched to the country before the suspension of its activities, according to reports .
 The attack undoubtedly reinforced the Cuban belief that the U.S. could not be trusted . The attack is the latest in a series of attacks on Cuban dissidents .
 Their first inclination would have been to conclude that the U.S. destabilisation campaign was still at work . Their first reaction to the situation was that the United States destabilised the country .
 It is possible they viewed the attack as a ploy in the US-Soviet negotiations about the removal of the IL-28S and on-sight inspection .
 Cuban officials would have been unlikely to interpret the Mongoose bombing as a negotiating tactic . Cuba was not party to the negotiations, since it was not part of it .
 U.S. surveillance planes had been used to support sabotage operations, Cuba says . Mongoose raids led Cuba to be adamant about the violation of airspace .
 Cuba saw the flights as continued preparation for an invasion . Castro warned that surveillance craft would be destroyed . Cuba did make an offer — on 25 November, after the crisis ended — to allow UN inspection .
 The agreement with Kennedy left no room for Cuban participation . It offered Cuba no opportunity to bring the U.S. to the bargaining table over matters of vital Cuban interest .
 A simple demand that the U.S. talk to Cuba would have been difficult for Kennedy to reject . Kennedy would have rejected such a demand at the moment when the world stood at the brink .
 Castro no doubt found it difficult to fathom why Khrushchev would not include such a demand in his deal . Castro found it hard to funder why Khrrushchev didn't include such an offer . Castro's deal was signed by the Soviet Union in 1961 .
 Castro was angry that Khrushchev did not notify him before announcing that the missiles would be removed . This probably contributed to Castro's anger as much as the fact that he was not notified of the decision .
 Had Castro been involved in negotiations, there is little doubt that a resolution of the crisis would have been more difficult . Had he been involved, the resolution of this crisis would be more difficult, he says .
 Some argue that his 'adventurism' led to the placement of the missiles in Cuba,108 and from this point of view he would have been an irascible negotiator .
 Had Cuba been included in negotiations, its interests would have been taken into account . Cuba's interests would need to have been considered in the negotiations .
 Non-offensive weapons such as the IL-28S and Komar patrol boats, as well as all Soviet troops, were also to be withdrawn . Not only were the missiles to be removed, the weapons were also withdrawn from Soviet troops .
 Cuba viewed the bombers and patrol boats as key weapons in the fight against terrorist attacks . Cuba viewed bombers and boats as a key weapon in fight against terrorism .
 Cuban resistance to the accords must be seen as more than mere obstinacy or pique . In this light, Cuban resistance is rather more than simply pique or obstinacity, it is said .
 Cuba's relations with the U.S. have been strained in recent years . Cuba's relationship with the United States has been strained for years . The Cuban government has been criticized for its lack of transparency in Cuba .
 Soviet Union did propose direct US-Cuban negotiations ' regarding the removal of the Guantanamo naval base' in joint Cuban-Soviet protocol offered on 15 November .
 The Cuban factor in this equation, though, is largely missing, particularly during the period from 28 October to 20 November, when Cuba acted most independently and had the greatest potential to generate a major conflict . Cuba acted in this period of October to November .
 Cuban analysis of why U.S. sought removal of IL-28S and Komars is not complete . Cuban expectations of a U .S. attack before 20 November are not known, Cuban officials say .
 We do not know much about the negotiations between Anastas Mikoyan and the Cuban leaders . We also don't know whether the Soviet leader provided details on Soviet negotiations with the United States .
 The extent of Cuba's attentiveness to Latin America during the crisis is unknown . Cuba's response to the crisis in Latin America has not been revealed .
 Castro was contemptuous of the OAS's unanimous endorsement of the US position on 24 October . Cuba must have been aware of rumours that the Latin Americans' support was coerced .
 Cuba sought at the time to maintain good relations with several countries in the hemisphere, such as Brazil and Mexico, which had publicly opposed a U.S. attack against Cuba . Cuba also sought to maintain relations with Brazil, Mexico and Mexico .
 It is unclear what advice the Latin American countries offered Cuba, and how the advice was received .
 President Kennedy wisely 'instructed all members of the ExComm and government that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory' Yet at the same time there seems to have been, if not delight taken over Cuba's sense of vulnerability, at least
 There is no evidence that the ExComm considered offering a no invasion pledge to Cuba during the legendary thirteen days of the Cuban crisis .
 Only negotiating ploy contemplated was vis-a-vis Soviet concerns, namely the missiles in Turkey . The only negotiating ploy was to protect Turkey from the Soviet Union .
 Cuba acted on its own interests and acted on them, says CNN.com's John Sutter . Cuba had its own interest, he says, but acted on it . Cuba acted in the interests of its own people, he adds .
 Cuban decisions and assessments had a bearing on the way in which the crisis developed, evolved and ended, and on how close it brought the world to oblivion . Cuban decisions, assessments have a bearing in the way it developed and evolved .
 This new perspective on the missile crisis also forces us to reassess the consequences that flowed from the crisis . The consequences of the crisis are still relevant today, writes CNN's Peter Bergen .
 There has been considerable analysis about the consequences for the superpowers,116 but little detailed analysis about Cuba and the crisis aftermath .
 The general view is that the crisis led to significant strains between Cuba and the Soviet Union . The Cuban prime minister implicitly chided the Soviets for abandoning armed struggle . Even during Castro's 1963 trip to the Soviet .
 Sergo Mikoyan said he felt tension between the two countries as late as 1971, three years after Cuba endorsed the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia and relations supposedly improved .
 ExComm was sensitive to Turkish and NATO concerns about withdrawal of missiles without consultation . U.S. officials did not extrapolate this sensitivity to the parallel circumstance of the Soviet Union and Cuba .
 An alternative explanation, of course, is that the Kennedy Administration did not want to abandon its hope of destroying the Cuban revolution, he says .
 Cuba still relied heavily on the Eastern bloc for economic support . Cuba still relies heavily on Eastern blocs for support .
 Cuba's sense of national security may have been more closely related to national security . The Cuban government has been tight-lipped about the situation in Cuba .
 Cuban officials seem to have concluded that the Soviet Union would not risk its own security ' for the sake of Cuba' Anastas Mikoyan reportedly admitted to Warsaw Pact ambassadors on 30 November 1 9 6 2 . m . If Cuba could no longer count on Soviet Union for its defence
 In October 1963, 13 CIA major actions against Cuba were approved for the next two months alone . The sabotage of an electric power plant, a sugar mill, and an oil refinery were among those approved .
 Authorised CIA raids continued at least until 1965, as did CIA attempts on Castro's life . Authorised raids on Castro continued until 1965 . CIA attempts to kill Castro were also attempted .
 By adding a Cuban perspective to the picture of missile crisis decision-making, it becomes even clearer that the potential for miscalculation was great .
 Cuban leaders were new to ' h i g h h ' politics, as one Cuban delegate to the Moscow conference said in a 1989 interview . Cuban leaders are new to politics, Cuban delegates said in an interview in 1989 .
 They did not have experience in dealing with matters that had global implications, they said . They said they were prepared to deal with matters with global implications . They were not prepared to be dealt with such matters, they added .
 The emerging view about how the missile crisis was managed has led to a new dictum . It is not the first time the crisis has been managed by the U.S.
 Even in 1962 this was appreciated, and the so-called 'hot line' was installed soon after the crisis . The 'Hot line' has been installed since 1962 .
 When we add Cuba to the crisis equation, this prescription does not seem as potent . However, when we add Cuban to the equation, it seems as potent as the current crisis .
 Cuba seems to have understood U.S. intentions quite well . Improved communications can reduce misunderstanding, but Cuba understands its intentions .
 This suggests a lesson from the crisis that has been overlooked, because prior analyses have focused only on the two superpowers . This suggests that there is a lesson to be learned from this crisis, which has been ignored .
 For a small power, conventional warfare may be as threatening as nuclear warfare is to the U.S. Small power is likely to take whatever steps necessary to reduce the threat, CNN says .
 The use of force or the threat of force to achieve political ends can have destabilising consequences for all parties involved . Thus when the United States deals with small countries, the U.S. deals with them, it can destabilise the situation .
 Cuban perspective in analysis of missile crisis may be overstating, he says . Cuban perspective may be useful, but it's not overstated, he adds .
 At each point, improved communications might have reduced the potential for unintended conflict and even the hostility between the countries .
 With limited information we have about Cuban motives, calculations and decisions, however, we are handicapped in assessing how improved communications might have affected the crisis . With the limited information, we can't assess how improved communication might have helped, however .
 It is not too early to conclude that only by reintroducing Cuba into the Cuban missile crisis, can we hope to develop a picture of the full significance of the crisis itself . Despite gaps in our knowledge about Cuban perceptions, motives and behaviour during the crisis, it is not early .