 The threat of war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union lingered well beyond Khrushchev's Oct. 1962 vow to withdraw nuclear missiles from Cuba . Fifteen newly declassified letters between the United States president and Soviet premier show that the threat lingered .
 The State Department released the letters nine months after Soviet officials approved their distribution . The letters were released by State Department nine months ago .
 Documents give details of the gambits and musings of two strong-willed leaders of the Cold War . For five years, U.S. officials refused legal efforts to free the documents .
 The documents were released in advance of an unprecedented conference scheduled to begin today in Havana, Cuba . The conference is bringing together participants and historians from all three nations involved in the crisis .
 Kennedy demanded the removal of Soviet bombers from Cuba, calling them ""offensive weapons" Khrushchev sought a formal promise that the United States would never invade Cuba .
 Cuba in the decades to come acquired much more sophisticated MiG fighter planes capable of menacing the United States . Although the Soviets eventually withdrew their Il-28 bombers, Cuba eventually acquired more sophisticated fighter planes . The MiGs were capable of threatening the US.
 Kennedy ultimately refused to sign a vow not to attack Cuba . Despite verbal assurances, Kennedy ultimately agreed to the deal .
 The letters began Oct. 1962, two days after Khrushchev gave the all-important order to begin dismantling the nuclear missiles . The letters were sent to the Soviet Union in October 1962 . They included photos of the missiles capable of reaching 2,000 miles away .
 Khrushchev repeatedly reminded Kennedy of his ""concessions"" that led to the Soviet drawdown . Kennedy was the president of the Soviet Union in the 1960s .
 Castro would keep his people in a constant state of preparedness in fear of a U.S. invasion . For the next 30 years, Castro kept his country in a state of readiness for invasion .
 Khrushchev continued their battle of wits and bravado in a series of letters . The letters were signed by the then-Krushchev government of the Soviet Union .
 The State Department released the letters Monday, nine months after Soviet officials approved their distribution . State Department says the letters were released by Soviet officials .
 The documents detail the gambits and musings of two strong-willed leaders of the Cold War . For five years, U.S. officials refused legal efforts to free the documents .
 The documents were released in advance of an unprecedented conference scheduled to begin today in Havana . The conference will bring together participants and historians from all three nations involved in the crisis .
 Soviet ships carrying weapons to Cuba respected a U.S. blockade and returned home . Two issues arose to muddle the compromise, the letters show .
 Kennedy demanded the removal of Soviet bombers from the island, calling them ''offensive weapons'' Khrushchev sought a formal promise that the United States would never invade Cuba .
 Despite oral assurances, Kennedy ultimately refused to sign a vow not to attack Cuba . Kennedy ultimately signed a vow that he would not attack the island .
 The letters were sent between Washington and Moscow through Dec. 1962 . They were sent from Washington to Moscow .
 Kennedy would give assurances against a U.S. invasion of Cuba but not guarantee it would not occur . Kennedy would not say if it would happen, but would say it would never happen .
 Castro would keep his people in a state of agitation and preparedness in fear of a U.S. invasion . For the next 30 years, Castro kept his people prepared for invasion . Castro's people would keep their people in an agitated state .
 Khrushchev tried to save face and strike the best arrangement for Castro's Cuba . The letters are believed to have been written personally by the Soviet leader .
 He tried to cajole Kennedy into accepting ''a gentleman's word'' that he would withdraw the Il-28s . He said he was trying to get Kennedy to withdraw them .
 Khrushchev did not bring up Castro's primary list of demands, which included an end to U.S. overflights, until several weeks after the October showdown . Castro's demands included a end to United States overflights .
 The conference in southwest Moscow is the first on the topic to bring together representatives of the United States, Soviet Union and Cuba . Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko will attend .
 Each side has its own version of events of what happened in October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. imposed a quarantine on the island and demanded and obtained the rockets' removal .
 Cubans complain that the Soviets did not consult them sufficiently during the crisis, a participant says . At Friday's session, Cubans complained about the Soviets' lack of consultation with them .
 The session was closed to reporters, and the participant spoke on condition of anonymity . The participant spoke to reporters at the session .
 The participant said they also complained that the United States should have used diplomatic channels to express its demand that the Soviet missiles be withdrawn and to clarify its intentions .
 Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he had not anticipated the U.S. reaction, a participant says . The Soviet premier's actions humiliated his country, the participant said . The event took place at a Kremlin think tank .
 Khrushchev praised as a ''great statesman'' who succeeded in getting the Americans to pledge not to invade Cuba . Other Soviet officials at the session praised Khrushchev .
 McNamara and other U.S. participants - including McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorenson and Pierre Salinger - exchange thoughts with Soviets including Gromyko and Arbatov .
 The conference in southwest Moscow is the first on the topic to bring together representatives of the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba . Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko will attend .
 Each side has its own version of what happened in October 1962, when the Soviets deployed nuclear missiles in Cuba . The U.S. imposed a quarantine on the island and demanded and obtained the rockets' removal .
 The participant said they also complained that the United States should have used diplomatic channels to express its demand that the Soviet missiles be withdrawn and to clarify American intentions .
 Khrushchev erred in shipping nuclear missiles to Cuba because he hadn't anticipated the U.S. reaction and humiliated his country, a participant said . Georgy A Arbatov, head of the U .S.A.-Canada Institute, a Kremlin think tank, said
 McNamara and other U.S. participants - including McGeorge Bundy, Theodore Sorenson and Pierre Salinger - are exchanging thoughts with Soviets including Gromyko, Arbatov and Anatoly F Dobrynin .
 William B Ecker led low-level sorties over Cuba in October 1962 . Ecker provided photographic evidence of Russian missile installations that almost led to a nuclear confrontation between the U.S. and the Soviets .
 U-2 spy planes had started to document Soviet attempts to ship missile parts to Cuba . By the time the fighter pilot commanded an aerial reconnaissance squadron over Cuba on Oct. 31, he was flying a reconnaissance squadron .
 Images were taken from too great an altitude to prove definitively the Soviets' intentions in the communist country . But the images were taken in the Soviet-era Soviet Union .
 Ecker's close-up pictures were taken over a site near the town of San Cristobal in western Cuba . They were credited with showing beyond a doubt the existence of the missiles .
 The black-and-white images captured missile equipment, fueling vehicles and other related materials . The images capture missile equipment and fueling vehicles . The black and white images captured missiles, fuel trucks and missiles .
 The evidence, combined with a U.S. naval blockade of Cuba, worsened a nuclear standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union . The evidence led to a United States naval blockade .
 Adlai Stevenson, then U.S. ambassador to the U.N., reportedly displayed some of Capt. Capt. John Sutter's photos .
 U.N. Security Council demanded an answer from the Russian ambassador about placing missiles on Cuban soil . Ecker's aerial photographs were taken at a meeting of the United Nations Security Council .
 The crisis deepened before a resolution days later, when the Soviet Union agreed to remove the missiles . President John F Kennedy said the U.S. would remove missiles from Turkey .
 Ecker went on to direct Naval photography and reconnaissance in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations . Ecker was a member of the U.S. Navy's most senior staff .
 He received the Distinguished Flying Cross in 1962 for his quick but risky flight over Cuba . He was awarded the D.D.C. in 1962 .
 From 1988 to 1998, he was a docent at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum's facility in Suitland, Md., for preservation, restoration and storage of aircraft, spacecraft and other artifacts .
 Ecker portrayed by actor Christopher Lawford in the 2000 Hollywood film ""Thirteen Days,"" starring Kevin Costner as an aide to Kennedy during the Cuban missile crisis . Ecker was portrayed in the film "Th13 Days"
 The next year, he traveled to Cuba as part of a U.S. delegation commemorating the missile crisis .
 He expressed little regard for Cuban leader Fidel Castro -""just kind of a four-flusher,"" he said . But he admired the country's skill at making cigars .
 Former U.S. Defence Secretary Robert McNamara and other aides of President John F Kennedy are taking part in the three-day conference . The conference was attended by Cuban President Fidel Castro .
 McNamara credited Castro, Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction . McNamara ultimately credited the world with saving it from destruction in the 1960s .
 Bush invoked the Cuban missile crisis to justify a possible preemptive attack on Iraq . Bush, a Republican, invoked the crisis in a speech Monday to justify the Iraq invasion . Bush said the missile crisis was a pre-emptive attack against Iraq .
 Massachusetts Democratic Senator Edward Kennedy replied that his brother avoided a pre-emptive strike on Cuba by imposing a naval quarantine .
 Historians say Bush took Kennedy's words out of context and was misreading history . Kennedy White House aides say Bush misread history . Historian Arthur Schlesinger and speechwriter Theodore Sorensen said Bush had taken Kennedy's comments taken out context . Bush's comments were taken
 JFK was killed in 1963 and his father deposed by Leonid Brezhnev in 1964 . The mutual trust and desire for peace developed during the 1962 crisis could have continued to change history .
 Krushchev, former Kennedy advisers Theodore Sorensen and Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., and Josefina Vidal, first secretary of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington D.C. presented Russian, American and Cuban perspectives on the 1962 crisis .
 All agreed the 43-year-old U.S. embargo of Cuba should be lifted . Cuba has been the source of Cuba's economic woes for decades .
 Krushchev, Sorensen and Schlesinger criticized the Bush administration's adoption of a pre-emptive strike policy against Iraq . They also criticized the containment and deterrence policy the United States has exercised throughout the nuclear era .
 Steve Heyser of Apalachicola, Florida, had flown the first U-2 overflight of Cuba 10 days earlier . Steve had flown first overflight 10 days before .
 As I climbed out I viewed the peaceful, beautiful blue Florida sky with a few puffs of brilliantly white cotton ball clouds below me . A background of green coral sea surrounding the Florida Keys blending into a deep blue .
 As I coasted in over Cuba I looked directly below me through the periscope viewfinder . I was flying over Cuba with the U.S. Coast Guard .
 The deep green Cuban forest quickly replaced the blue of the sea outlined by a thread of white beach . It was the first time the deep green forest had been seen in Cuba .
 Havana, Cuba, is Cuba's first major city to photograph . The Cuban capital is located just west of Havana . The city is located on the coast of Cuba .
 There it was, straight ahead, the white scars where the earth had been torn asunder in order to receive the emplacement of Soviet nuclear tipped ballistic missiles . The scars were caused by the destruction of the earth by the Soviet Union .
 Nearby were the scars of the surface-to-air missile sites emplaced to shoot down intruders into Cuban airspace . Nearby was the site of the missile sites used to defend Cuban airspace from intruders .
 Their signature outline looked like a black and white drawing of the flower we call a daisy . Their traditional signature outline was a black-white drawing of a flower .
 The length of the strobe showed me whenever I was in their 25-mile lethal range of their surface-to-air missile sites surrounding each radar . It showed me that the U.S. had a 25-miles lethal range around the world .
 Our country needed to know the status of the nuclear missile sites' construction, says South Korean president .
 Those nuclear missiles would soon pose an unacceptable threat to the U.S. President Barack Obama .
 Both trails rising vertically from the missile site had a starburst of white at the top of each . The trails rising from the site had the same white starburst as the other .
 "I realized the Soviets had fired two missiles at me, but had missed. Instantly I realized I realized that I had been hit by two missiles," he said .
 I made my coast out radio call and knew that in a little over an hour I would land at McCoy Air Force Base near Orlando, Florida . I made a coast-to-coast radio call to say that I was going to land near Orlando .
 In the perspective of our world's history, I guess it was just like any other day, but not for me . In the world's perspective, it was a day just like another day, the day of the day .
 The Charlotte County detachment of the Marine Corps League is playing host to the annual celebration . The Italian-American Club of Charlotte County will host the event on Nov. 11 .
 Festivities will include an ""attitude adjustment hour"" at 5m. with a cash bar, the traditional cake-cutting ceremony at 6m., and a sit-down dinner beginning at 7m.
 There will be champagne toasts, music for your dancing pleasure and giveaways and other surprises . Champagne toasts will be held at the end of each night .
 Dress is semi-formal, and veterans are encouraged to wear their respective uniforms . The event will be held in honor of veterans .
 Senior Writer, 'A flight on the wild side', writes senior writer .
 Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in Havana, Cuba, to discuss the missile crisis that nearly sparked a nuclear war 40 years ago . Defense Secretary McNamara to discuss missile crisis with Cuban president .
 Theodore C Sorensen, former special counsel to President Kennedy, listens to Cuban President Fidel Castro on Friday during the opening day of a three-day conference to discuss the 1962 missile crisis with Cuban officials .
 Cuban President Fidel Castro listens to former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in Havana, Cuba . Former Secretary of State John Kerry met with former President George W. Bush .
 Officials revisit the Cuban missile crisis 40 years ago this month . Former U.S. officials who considered attacking Cuba sat down with Fidel Castro to reflect on the missile crisis .
 Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen are also attending . Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba .
 Castro, McNamara were studying newly declassified documents on the role U.S. covert action played in months leading up to the crisis . Castro and McNamara in that Cold War drama were studying documents .
 Fernandez said most studies of the events had concentrated on the two superpowers, the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Fernandez expressed hope that more would be understood about Cuba's role in the events .
 McNamara outlined some of the questions he hoped would be answered at the conference . McNamara said on the eve of the conference, he hopes answers will be answered .
 The key Cuban participant at the conference is 76-year-old Castro, 76 . Castro was a young revolutionary leader in power for just three years in power .
 Those attending the conference will travel to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in the western province of Pinar del Rio . The conference will also focus on the crisis's impact on the region .
 Cuban air force pilots who shot down two American Cessnas in Florida Straits showed a startling lack of professionalism under pressure, experts say .
 State-of-the-art, Sovietmade fighter jets annihilated the small civilian aircraft - the air force equivalent of a gorilla stomping ants .
 Expert: "You've got what's acting more like a motorcycle gang flying supersonic jets out there operating in a nonprofessional way" Experts: "It's acting like a ... motorcycle gang"
 United Nations Ambassador Madeleine Albright emphasized that the pilots shouted ""cojones,"" or balls, after blowing the first Cessna out of the sky .
 Orestes Lorenzo, a former Cuban fighter pilot, defected to the U.S. with his MiG-23 in 1991 . Lorenzo attributed the behavior to the political atmosphere whipped up inside Cuba in the days before the downing .
 Lorenzo described the elder Perez, Alberto, as ""a bully"" who easily could have banked his plane and made the missile miss the Cessna, but chose to give it a direct hit . Lorenzo described Alberto as a bully .
 The Cuban officer who authorized the shootdown may have been the nation's air force chief, Lorenzo says . Lorenzo: Cuban officer may have authorized shootdown . He says Cuban officer authorized shoot-down may be air force leader .
 The officer identified himself on the radio to his men as ""020,"" a code number that has traditionally belonged to the commander of the air force, he said . The code number has traditionally been reserved for air force commanders, the officer said .
 He said other possibilities were that it was Defense Minister Raul Castro or two other air force generals .
 "You are authorized to destroy,"" a voice said from the Havana control tower . The MiG-29 locked one of its air-to-air missiles onto one of the Cessnas .
 Lorenzo said Cuban pilots weren't permitted to talk in the manner of the two MiG pilots . Lorenzo said when he was part of the Cuban air force, pilots were not allowed to talk like the two .
 Uri Dromi called ""the Soviet doctrine,"" meaning air traffic control calls the shots . Air traffic control guides pilots to their targets and authorizes the airmen to strike . Uri Dromi called ""The Soviet doctrine"
 Cuban Air Traffic Control guides the pilots to their targets . After considerable back-and-forth, the Perez Perez Perez brothers were given authorization to shoot .
 Brothers to the Rescue plane is in the sky, uncertain about what to do . Brothers briefly discuss whether to buzz the plane, rather than rocket it . While they're in the air, the two brothers briefly discuss between themselves .
 "Because some vessels are approaching there, I'm going to give it a pass," she says . "I'm not going to let it pass. Because some vessels were approaching there," she adds .
 It is unclear from the transcript whether the controllers heard the brothers discuss the pass - which Lorenzo says clearly describes an intent to buzz the aircraft, rather than shoot it down . Lorenzo says the brothers clearly intended to buzz down .
 Had they done that, he said, the MiGs would have clearly scared the Cessnas away, or could have forced them to land, he added .
 The plan to shoot down the civilian aircraft is back on . Ground control reasserts its directing authority from the moment ground control is reasserted .
 Lorenzo says pilots knew they would be destroying an unarmed civilian aircraft . Lorenzo says it is clear the pilots knew it would be a mistake to destroy the plane .
 If pilots were ordered to destroy the planes, as Lorenzo believes, he said their careers as pilots would have been sorely damaged -if not ended . Lorenzo said the pilots would be sorely damaged if they had been ordered to do so .
 Before the MiG29 fired on it, the pilot told ground traffic control the target was a Cessna 337 . The pilot said the target of the attack was an aircraft that had crashed into a plane .
 Once the authorization came, and the MiG destroyed the plane the brothers began chanting ""cojones,"" in exultation . The brothers were able to carry out the mission .
 Lorenzo says the word has become an expression of antiAmericanism . Castro personally led a demonstration by tens of thousands of Cubans outside the United States Interests Section in Havana five or six years ago .
 Roberto Robaina, now foreign minister, leads the group in the chant . Robaina grabbed the microphone and led the group to the chant. Robaina is now the foreign minister .
 Watts read as a classic example of the pressure of the mission . During another exchange between ground control and the Perez brothers, after the pilots have identified and been authorized to shoot down the second Cessna .
 American and Western combat pilots have been known to cheer their successful attacks on Iraqi targets, sometimes including civilian targets, he says . True, he said, but he said U.S. and Western . combat pilots were known . to cheer .
 Lambeth said: "They weren't rubbing their hands with glee that they had ripped the cojones out of this hapless Cuban emigre. But, Lambeth says, they weren't glee."
 A Soviet general confirmed for the first time that one-third of his country's nuclear warheads designed to strike the U.S. were on Cuba at the time . A third of the country's nukes were located in Cuba, he said .
 The warheads had not been mounted on missile launchers and were not ready for firing, an official said . The warheads were not mounted on missiles launchers and not ready to be fired, he said .
 The revelations came during a review of the Cuban missile crisis at a conference over the weekend at a trade union center .
 This was the first joint meeting with Cuban officials who guided their country through the crisis .
 Nikita Khrushchev eventually withdrew the missiles in exchange for President Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba . Nikita was eventually forced to withdraw the missiles from Cuba .
 McNamara says the figures were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo . McNamara: The figures on Cuba's war readiness and casualty estimate are provided by a Cuban official .
 "They were determined to fight to the death of every man," McNamara says . McNamara: "They believed there would be 100,000 Cuban and Soviet casualties,"" McNamara said .
 It is not clear whether the 100,000 casualty estimate includes deaths and injuries . It is unclear whether it includes deaths or injuries among soldiers and civilians .
 Cubans had said the casualty count could have reached 800,000, U.S. officials said . Other American officials said privately the Cubans said the death toll could have been 800-000 .
 McNamara said that of the troops, 40,000 were Soviet, four times higher than U.S. intelligence estimates at the time . McNamara: Of the troops in the Soviet invasion of the Cold War, the majority were Soviet troops .
 '270,000 CUBANS, SOVIets POISED FOR WAR IN '62 CRISIS', St. Louis newspaper reports . St. Paul's '62 Crisis' was a '62 crisis'
 Brookings Institution: Soviet policy of greater openness, or ""glasnost,"" is beginning to publicly discuss formerly taboo subjects . State Department participant in the crisis says Soviet sources are beginning to talk about formerly taboo topics .
 42,000 Soviet troops were in Cuba in the fall of 1962, according to Garthoff's article . This is the most eye-opening revelation in the article .
 The full Soviet military complement in Cuba in October 1962 totaled 42,000 men,"" wrote Garthoff. Sergo Mikoyan has now confirmed that the . full Soviet . military complement . in October . 1962 .