 Submarine B-59's position is indicated by the bright red rectangle outside the map itself, at top center of the margin . Submarine was the last submarine to be sunk in the Battle of the Atlantic .
 The original Soviet Navy map of the Caribbean shows the locations of the four ""Foxtrot"" diesel submarines that had deployed from the Kola peninsula northwest of Murmansk on October 1, 1962, bound for Mariel port in Cuba to establish a submarine base there .
 Unknown to the United States Navy, each of the subs carried a nuclear-tipped torpedo, with oral instructions to use them if attacked by the Americans and hulled either above or below the waterline .
 The documents include the never-before-published after-action report prepared by Soviet Northern Fleet Headquarters . The report describes the atrocious conditions aboard the subs, which were not designed for operations in tropical waters .
 The State Department communicated this procedure to ""other Governments"" including the Soviet Foreign Ministry . But the Soviet submarine commanders, in a series of interviews in recent years, report they never received the message .
 U.S. efforts to locate Soviet submarines during underwater missile crisis . Submarine crisis was a subplot of the crisis in the United States .
 Since 27 September 1962, the United States Navy had been tracking the subs using listening posts that detected electronically-compressed ""burst radio transmissions"" between Soviet Navy command posts and the submarines themselves .
 The messages could not be deciphered but the location from where they were transmitted could be identified . The location of where the messages were transmitted was also identified .
 U.S. Navy analysts had assumed that subs were on their way to the Barents Sea for exercises . But they discovered they were in the North Atlantic on the way to Cuba . Subs were found to be in North Atlantic heading for Cuba .
 Another high-tech method for tracking subs was the Sound Surveillance System . Sound surveillance system detected the noise made by submarine engines . Submarine engines can also be detected by sound surveillance systems .
 The Navy also used ""mad contacts"", referring to magnetic anomaly detection . ""Julie"" and ""Jezebel"" sonobouys were also used .
 Video of Soviet signals intelligence officer Vadim Orlov from the historic 2002 40th anniversary conference on the Missile Crisis, in Havana, Cuba .
 Orlov served on the B-59 submarine and witnessed how close the sub's commander came to arming the nuclear torpedo aboard . Orlov says he saw how close to arming a nuclear torpedo .
 John Peterson at the 2002 Havana conference, describing the hunt for Orlov's submarine, acknowledged that the ""signaling depth charges"" he and his crew dropped on the Soviets might have sounded very different to the Soviet sailors down below .
 Archive's previous publication established the precise date and time of the confrontation with submarine B-59 . Today's posting includes the Navy cables, deck logs, Flag Plot charts, and photographs from the October 27 tracking and surfacing of B-58 .
 Soviet Navy map depicting Foxtrot sub locations near Cuba, late October 1962 . New evidence on the Soviet Submarines provides new evidence of Soviet submarine operations .
 Recent photo of Ryurik Ketov, captain of Soviet submarine B-4 . Photo by Svetlana Savranskaya .
 Vadim Orlov's account includes the controversial depiction of an order by Captain Valentin Savitsky to assemble the nuclear torpedo . Orlov: "We Will Sink Them All, But We Will Not Disgrace Our Navy"
 Orlov provides an updated account of his unhappy experiences in submarine B-59 . Orlov: "Orlov provided an update on his unhappy experience" Orlov was in the submarine submarine .
 Peterson's recounting gives the American perspective on the U.S. Navy's attempts to surface Soviet subs . Peterson: "It's a war of sorts"
 Cony, DD 508, also part of TG 83.2, shows its role in tracking, signaling, and surfacing submarine C-19.2 . Cony was part of the first TG-83.2 submarine .
 As of 27 October 1962 0600Q Source: Washington Navy Yard, Naval Historical Center, Operational Archives . Cuba Missile Crisis 31-2 .
 Washington Navy Yard, Naval Historical Center, Operational Archives, Opal Archives, Flag Plot Cuba Missile Crisis 31-2, file: Cuba missile crisis 31-1 .
 Other accounts were not aware of this detection capability via the interception of burst transmissions . Other accounts did not know this .
 Magnetic anomaly sensors detect changes in the Earth's magnetic field . The passing of large ferrous objects such as ships and submarines through the magnetic field produces detectable changes . Magnetic anomalies are detected by magnetic anomaly sensors .
 ASW aircraft must be practically overhead or very close to a submarine's position . To detect such a change or anomaly, an ASW plane must be very near to the submarine .
 Julie and Jezebell are types of sonobouys that use sonar technology to detect a submarine either actively or passively, by detecting sound, for example, with hydrophones .
 Most sonobouys are small and cylindrical in shape and distributed by aircraft or ships . Most are distributed by planes or ships, and are distributed in the shape of cylindrums .
 Julie sonobouys release charges that explode at predetermined depths to provide echo-ranging data . Jezebel sonoboyys are airborne devices that detect low-frequency sounds originating from underwater sources of energy .